

NIKOLAI OSTROVSKY 


J-Cow the SteeC 
tVas "tempered 

A NOVEL IN TWO PARTS 

TJAHrOME 


TRANSLATED FROM RUSSIAN BY 

R. PROKOFIEVA 

ILLUSTRATIONS BY 

A. REZNICHENKO 

DESIGN AND LAYOUT BY 

J. ANDREWS 


Published by: 


COMMUNIST PARTY OF AUSTRALIA 
SYDNEY, AUSTRALIA 
AUGUST 2002 


This edition has been reproduced from an original published by: 


FOREIGN LANGUAGES PUBLISHING HOUSE 
MOSCOW, USSR 
1952 


CONTENTS 


5 Fore ward 

20 How the Steel Was Tempered — Part 1 

225 Key to Principal Characters 

226 Notes on the 2004 Edition 


NIKOLAI OSTROVSKY AND HIS NOVEL 


N ikolai Ostrovsky’s novel, How the Steel Was 
Tempered, occupies a place of prominence 
in the history of Soviet literature. The making of the 
book, as well as the whole of Ostrovsky’s literary 
work, was a deed of valour crowning the life of a 
heroic Bolshevik. 

Ostrovsky was born in 1904, in the village of Viliya, 
Ostrozhsky District, Rovno Region. His father was a seasonal 
worker, but earnings were so meagre that his mother and 
young sisters had to work as agricultural labourers on landed 
estates. His elder brother was apprenticed to a locksmith 
who maltreated his workers. The dire poverty and ruthless 
exploitation which overshadowed the childhood of the future 
writer sowed the seeds of bitter hatred for his class enemies 
and wrathful protest against social injustice and human 
degradation. He was a shepherd boy at nine, and at eleven a 
kitchen boy in a railway station buffet in the Ukrainian town of 
Shepetovka, where the family had moved after the outbreak of 
the world war. 

To escape the atmosphere of corruption and servility 
prevailing in the buffet, the young Nikolai spent much of his 
time with his brother, a mechanic in the railway depot. 

It was there that he learned of the workers’ struggle for 
human rights, and heard the Bolsheviks speak of Lenin and 
Lenin’s ideas. 


5 


In the village school young Nikolai Ostrovsky had shown 
himself a pupil of extraordinary promise. When they moved to 
Shepetovka Nikolai’s parents sent him to a two-year school. In 
a few months, however, he was expelled on the insistence of 
the priest who taught the Scripture and whom the inquisitive 
lad had harassed with discomfiting questions. 

It took the Revolution of 1917 to open the doors of learning to 
Nikolai Ostrovsky. He managed to combine his arduous stoker’s 
job at the power station with his studies and participation in the 
school literary journal and a literary circle he himself organized. 
In his adolescent years Nikolai Ostrovsky’s heroes were men 
like Garibaldi and the Gadfly. He was a voracious reader, and 
the works of the great Ukrainian revolutionary poet Taras 
Shevchenko, Gogol’s romantic tale Taras Bulba and other 
classic writers captured the lad’s imagination. 

The civil war, which raged with especial ferocity in the 
Ukraine, then, according to J. V. Stalin, “the very centre of 
the day’s international life, the meeting point of the workers’ 
revolution begun in Russia and imperialist counterrevolution 
coming from the West,” drew the younger generation into 
the vortex of the class struggle. Young Ostrovsky and his 
friends helped the underground Revolutionary Committee 
to fight the invaders and the Ukrainian bourgeoisie who had 
treacherously opened the front to the German troops. On the 
liberation of Shepetovka young Ostrovsky was active in aiding 
the Revolutionary Committee to bring life back to normal, and 
combat blackmarketeering and counterrevolution. 

Nikolai Ostrovsky was among the first five Komsomol 
members of Shepetovka. In August 1919 he ran away from 
home and joined the Red Army, proving himself to be a valiant 
fighter. In the summer of 1920 he returned to his home town 
with a unit of the First Mounted Army, which had covered itself 
with glory in the war against the White Poles. 

But the war was not yet over, and 15 year-old Ostrovsky 


6 


soon volunteered for active service again. In the fighting 
at Lvov he was severely wounded and lost the sight of his 
right eye. Being demobilised after two months in hospital, he 
returned to Shepetovka. 

In the summer of 1921 Ostrovsky moved to Kiev, where he 
headed a local Komsomol organization, working as electrician 
in the railway workshops and going through a technical course 
at the same time. These were difficult times. Bread and fuel 
were scarce. Nikolai Ostrovsky led a brigade of young workers 
on the construction of a spur line to bring much-needed firewood 
to the city. The job, accomplished under extremely rigorous 
conditions, was successfully completed but it cost Nikolai 
Ostrovsky his health. The following autumn Nikolai Ostrovsky 
barely recovered from his illness, joined his Komsomol 
comrades in salvaging rafted timber from the autumn floods, 
working knee-deep in the icy water of the Dnieper. 

His battle wound, typhus and acute rheumatism undermined 
Ostrovsky’s health to such an extent that he was forced to give 
up his job in Kiev. But the very idea of being officially invalided 
and divorced from the political and creative life of the country 
went against his grain. He insisted on being given work, and 
in compliance with his wishes was sent to Berezdov, a small 
Ukrainian town on the old Western border, where he threw 
himself into important Party and Komsomol work. 

In 1924 Ostrovsky became a member of the Communist 
Party. By this time his health had deteriorated to a point that 
made work impossible. Despite the efforts of the best specialists 
and prolonged sanatorium treatment provided by the Party 
and Soviet Government, the disease (ankylotic polyarthritis) 
progressed rapidly. At the close of 1926 it became clear that 
the heroic youth was fated to be bedridden for life. Three years 
later he became totally blind and in 1930 complete fixation 
of the joints, excepting the hands and elbows, set in. With 
all hope of recovery gone, Nikolai Ostrovsky devised “a plan 


7 


that would give meaning to life, something that would justify 
existence.” Tragic as his position was, the young Bolshevik 
could not conceive of life apart from the people’s work and 
struggle. He resolved to return to the fighting ranks, armed with 
a new weapon - the written word. His heart was set on writing 
a book about the heroic past which would help the Party to 
bring up the rising generation in the spirit of Communism. This 
would be his contribution to the cause. 

It must have been in the year 1925 or 1926, during the 
first period of his terrible illness, that this idea first occurred 
to Ostrovsky. He was fond of reminiscing about the days and 
deeds of the first Komsomol members, and his stories showed 
him a gifted narrator. In those days, however, Ostrovsky did not 
think of himself as a writer. It was not until later, when he took 
a correspondence course at the Communist University which 
gave him a thorough grounding in Marxism and Leninism, that 
he began to see his experiences in a new light, to understand 
the role played by the Party of Lenin and Stalin in the liberation 
of his Motherland, the power of the ideas of Communism which 
had transfigured his land, his people and himself. 

Ostrovsky delved avidly into the works of the classic Russian 
writers - Pushkin, Gogol, Turgenev, Tolstoy, Chekhov and, 
above all, Gorky. A volume of selected works by Gorky, his 
Mother and a few others were Ostrovsky’s favourite reading. In 
later years he asked his friends and relatives to read Gorky to 
him and to copy out passages from Gorky on literature and on 
the tasks of the proletarian writer. He made a thorough study 
of political literature and books about the Civil War, primarily 
Chapayev and Mutiny by Dmitri Furmanov, The Iron Flood by 
A. Serafimovich, and Fadeyev’s Debacle, books dealing with 
the Russian people’s heroic struggle for freedom, and the birth 
of the new Soviet man. 

Then came the years of the First Stalin Five-Year Plan. 
“History had never known,” says the History of the C.P.S.U.(B.), 


8 


Short Course, “industrial construction on such a gigantic scale, 
such enthusiasm for new development, such labour heroism 
on the part of the working-class millions.” 

Hundreds of thousands of Komsomol members in common 
with the whole of the Soviet people took part in building the 
Magnitogorsk Iron and Steel Works, the Lenin Hydroelectric 
Station on the Dnieper, the Stalingrad Tractor Plant, and other 
great construction undertakings of the First Stalin Five-Year 
Plan. At the same time millions of peasants joined the mass 
collectivisation movement. 

It was under the influence of these great events that Nikolai 
Ostrovsky’s hero, “the hero of our time,” as his creator called 
him, took final shape in his mind. 

In November 1930, blind and prostrate, he began work on 
the novel How the Steel Was Tempered. Part of the book was 
written by the author’s own hand, despite the cruel pain and 
difficulties he must have experienced; the rest was dictated 
to his wife, his sister and his closest friends. In June 1933 the 
book was finished. 


How the Steel Was Tempered is a book about the birth of 
the New Man, the man of the socialist epoch who dares all and 
achieves all in the struggle for the happiness of humanity. 

The very conditions in which the book was written - the 
gallant fight put up by the author against pain and disease, 
the help rendered him by Party and Soviet authorities and, 
as often as not, by people who were neither his friends nor 
relatives - are in themselves indicative of the great changes 
that had been wrought in human relations, and of the birth of 
the New Man. 

The potent, life-asserting force of the idea which had gripped 
the mind of the young writer who had dedicated himself heart 


9 


and soul to “the finest thing in the world - the struggle for the 
liberation of mankind,” captivated all who came in contact with 
Nikolai Ostrovsky. 

How the Steel Was Tempered is the story of the author’s 
life, yet it is more than that - “it is a novel, and not simply the 
biography of Komsomol member Ostrovsky,” as the author 
himself has put it. The fact that in Pavel Korchagin we can 
easily detect a likeness to his creator is a characteristic feature 
of Ostrovsky, the writer - his affinity with his hero; the private, 
social and creative lives of both hero and author form one 
organic whole subordinated to service of the people. This 
is a feature common to all Soviet writers and one that lends 
convincing power and veracity to the characters they depict. 

Recasting his own biography, which was also to a large 
extent the Biography of his generation, Nikolai Ostrovsky 
begins the novel with a picture of the hero’s childhood, showing 
the reader how the mind and character of Pavel Korchagin 
are moulded by his resistance to a hostile environment; how 
he matures and awakens to the necessity of remaking this 
environment and the entire social system; how the people’s 
struggle for Socialism, by changing the economic conditions of 
social life, calls into being a new socialist consciousness and 
establishes a new code of social and individual behaviour, the 
basis of a genuinely humane morality. 

Labour, its character, form and content came in for great 
changes under the socialist system, welding millions of men 
in a single creative collective engaged in building, under a 
master plan, a new life for the Motherland, These changes, 
in their turn, reshape the ideas, sentiments and relations of 
Ostrovsky’s heroes. 

In the case of Pavel Korchagin the new attitude toward 
labour and socialist property appears immediately after his 
return from the frontlines. The feeling is born within him that he 
is the master of his workshops and of his country. This novel 


10 


feeling, an outgrowth of the new relations of production, is the 
motive force behind Korchagin’s fight against slackers and 
self-seekers, against workers who are criminally careless of 
their tools, forgetting that these now belong to the people. The 
same feeling makes Korchagin an ardent Komsomol worker, 
an implacable fighter against wreckers and smugglers and a 
fiery organizer of collectivisation in the countryside. The period 
of socialist up-building raised the sense of proprietorship to 
a new, higher plane. Millions of people became conscious 
builders of the socialist industry, the state and collective farms. 
The irresistible urge to be part of the creative labours of the 
people brought Pavel to his final creative exploit. 

Pavel Korchagin’s is the heroism inherent in the Russian 
working class. The nature of this heroism changes with 
each new period in Pavel Korchagin’s life. It is not a full- 
fledged revolutionary that rescues Zhukhrai from the Petlyura 
patrol; Pavel Korchagin’s spontaneous protest against the 
conditions of life draws him into the class struggle and gives 
way to a growing socialist consciousness. From self-denial 
in the name of lofty ideals in the Civil War, there springs a 
conscious communist self-discipline, serving as an example 
to the masses, which, in its turn, develops, towards the end of 
the novel, into a mature socialist consciousness determining 
Korchagin’s character and conduct. For, indeed, the disabled 
hero was under no obligation to launch his amazing struggle 
for a return to the ranks, none, that is, excepting the vital urge 
to take part in the life of the millions working for Socialism. 

Pavel Korchagin’s initial interpretation of his duty to the 
Revolution involved wholesale rejection of private life, of even 
so natural an attribute of youth as love. Pavel breaks off his 
friendship with Tonya, who came of a middleclass family, 
and suppresses a budding love for the Communist girl Rita 
Ustinovich. In a few years, however, Pavel Korchagin, like his 
creator in real life, renounces his asceticism - the senseless 


11 


tragedy of agonizing will-tests, so popular among the first 
Komsomol members. 

Pavel’s mother and Taya, his well-loved wife, are his 
comrades-in-arms in the revolutionary struggle. He himself 
brought them into the Communist Party. Through them he 
continues selflessly to serve the people. 

In portraying his hero, Nikolai Ostrovsky shows how 
Korchagin’s best qualities ripen in the process of his 
participation in the people’s struggle for Socialism. The spiritual 
beauty of Ostrovsky’s hero, the triumph of what he stands for 
are predetermined by the course of events depicted in the 
novel, by their historical truth. It is precisely this that makes 
Pavel Korchagin so typical of his generation. 

We cannot imagine Pavel Korchagin apart from the 
collective, from such comrades as Seryozha Bruzzhak, 
who goes to war so that there might be no more wars; as 
Seryozha’s sister Valya, the heroic young patriot executed by 
the White Poles; Ivan Zharky, the orphan who was adopted by 
a Red Army company; Nikolai Okunev, secretary of the District 
Komsomol Committee; Ivan Pankratov, the young stevedore. 

Like his comrades, Pavel Korchagin has inherited the finest 
qualities of the old Bolshevik guard, the leaders and teachers 
of youth in the revolutionary struggle. The elder generation 
is represented in the novel by the indefatigable Dolinnik, 
chairman of the underground Volost Revolutionary Committee; 
by the courageous revolutionary ex-sailor Fyodor Zhukhrai, 
a member of the Bolshevik Party since 1915; by Tokarev, 
a worker of the revolutionary underground; by the Military 
Commissar Kramer, and many others. The two generations 
are bound by invisible but unbreakable ties. 

Korchagin’s deeds of heroism are matched by those of his 
comrades. Pavel Korchagin is no exception among the many 
thousands that tread the same path. Throwing caution to the 
winds, Pavel attacks the Petlyura man guarding the arrested 


12 


Zhukhrai; Seryozha Bruzzhak, moved by a powerful feeling of 
protest against brutality and love of mankind, shields with his 
body an old Jew from a vicious sabre cut aimed by a drunken 
Petlyura trooper. Pavel Korchagin takes part in the famous 
operations of the First Mounted Army; Ivan Zharky distinguishes 
himself in the liberation of the Crimea from theWhite Guards. 

In building the railway spur Korchagin’s friends are as self- 
sacrificing as Pavel himself. It is a notable fact that Sergei 
Bruzzhak, another of his favourite characters, was also drawn 
from Ostrovsky’s own biography. The fact that so many of the 
novel’s characters share the same qualities makes them all the 
more typical and lifelike. 

Pavel and his friends aspire to an exacting moral purity in 
love and friendship. The theme of love and friendship runs 
through the whole novel and is given special prominence in 
such scenes as Pavel’s meeting with Tonya and Seryozha’s 
with Rita, in which the birth of a young love is described, and 
in the relations of Pavel and Taya, his wife and comrade Rita 
Ustinovich, Anna Borhardt, Lydia Polevykh and the other 
feminine characters of the novel are pure and noble and 
reflect the great changes which have taken place in human 
relationships. 

The novel condemns all that is sordid and degrading to 
human dignity, as may be seen from Pavel’s attitude towards 
the depraved Trotskyite Dubava, his encounter with the lewd 
Failo, and from the author’s treatment of what passed between 
Razvalikhin and Lida. Nikolai Ostrovsky shows how political 
double-dealing goes hand in hand with moral dissipation in 
private life, revealing the coarse construction placed upon 
sexual relationships by enemies of the people and chance 
followers of the Party and Komsomol. Bolshevik ideals are 
inseparably linked with the highest moral standards - this is 
one of the underlying ideas of the novel. 

The novel’s individual characters blend into a single image 


13 


of the people, who may be said to be its main hero. The 
people are well portrayed in the numerous mass scenes: 
battle episodes, the building of the railway branch line, Party 
and Komsomol meetings which repulse the Trotskyites, the 
holiday demonstration on the Soviet-Polish border, etc. These 
scenes are bound up with the private lives of the characters. 
In them the major problems facing the nation as a whole find 
their solution. Love of Country, implacable hatred of its foes, 
heroism in all things, big and small, in the name of lofty aims, 
a strong sense of proletarian internationalism and socialist 
humanism thus become more than individual traits, peculiar 
to Ostrovsky’s heroes, they are the traits of a whole people. 
Significantly enough, it is at the site of the backbreaking railway 
job that the words were uttered: Thus is the steel tempered! 

Ostrovsky, the artist, does not endeavour to bypass life’s 
sharp contradictions or underestimate the hardships of the 
struggle for the new world, a world of creative labour, against 
the dying world of oppression and exploitation. He does 
not conceal the influence the accursed past exerted on the 
working class, an influence but gradually eradicated in the 
process of the formation of the new socialist society. Nor does 
he gloss over the shortcomings of his hero, Pavel Korchagin. 
Ostrovsky’s novel owes much of its popularity to the fact that 
in describing the making of a hero it shows how the survival of 
capitalism in men’s consciousness can be overcome. 

Ostrovsky carries on the traditions of the Russian 
novel famed for its depth of content and insight into social 
contradictions and the social struggle. Pavel Korchagin is one 
of the best heroic characters created by Russian literature. 

But Ostrovsky has invested his hero with a new quality, a 
quality unshared by any of Pavel Korchagin’s predecessors, 
one that was engendered by the process of building Socialism 
and by the socialist society - the individual’s freedom of 
expression in the course of the struggle for an advanced social 


14 


ideal. Life itself in the late ‘twenties and early ‘thirties showed 
the author the Soviet man not only as a leader, a commander, 
or an organizer, but as a rank-and-file Bolshevik, an ordinary 
Komsomol member, with his rich spiritual world and his new 
attitude towards his social obligations and his personal life. 
An integral character, Pavel Korchagin typifies a whole period 
in the development of Soviet society, during which the new 
human being, a newcomer in history, took shape. 

The depiction of the people’s struggle for Socialism, which 
furnishes the background of the novel’s plot, and of the 
experiences, actions and destinies of its heroes; the depiction 
of labour, which transforms life and those who labour, and 
lastly, the depiction of new relations between men - all this 
makes Ostrovsky’s novel a genuine work of socialist realism. 
Like other Soviet authors, Nikolai Ostrovsky wrote in the Gorky 
tradition, which, however, did not prevent him from being a 
bold innovator, the creator of a new literary hero. 

Pavel Korchagin will always be the hero of the youth for 
many generations to come. Each generation produces more 
young people of the Korchagin mettle than the one before. 
With a perspicacity worthy of his great teacher Maxim Gorky, 
Ostrovsky discerned the truth of the future in the realities of 
his own time: the heroic traits and qualities of Pavel Korchagin 
are becoming more and more typical of the Soviet youth. The 
Great Patriotic War showed that these traits were shared by 
millions of Soviet people. Today, many of the best brigades 
of young Stakhanov workers at the great Stalin construction 
works are named after Nikolai Ostrovsky and his hero. 


Nikolai Ostrovsky was a purposeful artist fully aware of the 
task he set himself - the task of creating the portrait of a young 
fighter whose example the youth should follow. To achieve this, 
the book would have to be an ordinary biography, one which 


15 


showed that a similar path was possible for any young man. 
At the same time it had to be a heroic biography, for Ostrovsky 
saw a deeply romantic quality and much that was worthy of 
emulation in the everyday heroism which he believed to be 
typical of the working people, and with this spirit he imbued his 
main hero and his other characters. The concrete details he 
took from his own experiences and the life of his coevals. 

Characteristically enough, Ostrovsky refused to write 
about many heroic incidents of his past on the grounds that 
he was “afraid of overdoing it,” as he explained to his editor. 
He refrained from mentioning the fact that, as a boy, he once 
pasted up a number of leaflets printed by the underground 
Revolutionary Committee under the very nose of a German 
sentry; or the fact that as a fifteen-year-old youngster he 
blew up a bridge near Novograd-Volynsky; or the story of his 
scouting in a town seized by a kulak band. With the tact of the 
true artist Ostrovsky rejected all that would have made the life 
story of his hero extraordinary or unique. 

While incorporating some dangerous episode from his own 
biography in his book, Ostrovsky often tends to strip the incident 
of the perils and gallantry actually involved. For example, 
in describing the convoying of valuables from Berezdov to 
the regional centre over a dangerous road he merely states 
that the valuables were delivered safe and sound, although 
actually the trip was successful only thanks to the courage 
of Ostrovsky and the two militiamen accompanying him, who 
repelled a bandit attack en route. 

The radio looms large in Korchagin’s later life. In the novel 
the set which brought such comfort to the bedridden Pavel 
is assembled by his friend Bersenev. In reality Ostrovsky 
assembled it himself, spending one and a half or two months 
on the job. Here is what Ostrovsky himself told a friend about 
this remarkable exploit: 

“Just think! Blind as I was, I began assembling a radio set, 


16 


using such wretched material that even anyone with perfect 
eyesight would have sweated over it. What a job that was, 
working with only the sense of touch to guide me! To hell with 
it! When it was all over and the one-tube radio set was ready, I 
vowed never to undertake anything of the kind again.” 

The writing of the novel under the most arduous of conditions 
was, without doubt, Ostrovsky’s supreme act of heroism. It is 
this exploit that we recall when we think of Ostrovsky. Yet, in the 
novel the stress is laid not on the exploit as such but on all that 
is typical in the hero’s life, all that went into the preparation of 
the crowning exploit of a splendid life. What in Ostrovsky’s life 
took years of heroic struggle is over in the story of Korchagin 
in a few months. With the modesty of the true hero, Ostrovsky 
devotes only two or three pages to the creation of the book. 

In his portrayal of a young worker in the early years of the 
Revolution, Nikolai Ostrovsky revealed the typical features 
of not only the first Komsomol generation, but of the young 
man of the Lenin and Stalin epoch. This constitutes the chief 
contribution of Ostrovsky, the artist, and a victory for the 
method of socialist realism. And it is this that makes Pavel 
Korchagin immortal. 


* * * 


In 1935, on hearing that he had been awarded the Order 
of Lenin, Nikolai Ostrovsky addressed these fervent words of 
thanks to Joseph Stalin: 

“I have been reared by the Komsomol, the Party’s faithful 
assistant, and as long as my heart beats my life will be devoted 
to the Bolshevik education of the young generation of our 
Socialist Motherland.” 

The young author kept his word. Popular recognition, a 
brilliant comeback, thousands of letters from enthusiastic 
readers, and hundreds of visitors anxious to make his 


17 


acquaintance, the care and solicitude shown him by his 
Country, the Soviet Government, the Communist Party and the 
Komsomol, made the last years of Ostrovsky’s life radiant with 
happiness and sharpened his talent. 

While still working on his first novel for a re-edition, Nikolai 
Ostrovsky started his second book Born of the Storm. A second 
world war was then darkening the horizon. Encouraged by 
Anglo-American imperialism, the German and Japanese 
fascists were preparing war against the Land of Socialism. 

“We are all engaged in peaceful labour,” wrote Nikolai 
Ostrovsky, “our banner is Peace. The Party and Government 
have raised high this banner... We want peace, for we are 
building the crystal edifice of Communism. But it would 
be treachery to forget about the evil and vicious enemies 
surrounding us.” 

The task Ostrovsky set himself in his new book was to show 
the young generation, reared in the conditions of a socialist 
society, who their enemies were. 

“I am doing this,” Nikolai Ostrovsky explained his task, “so 
that in the battles to come - if they are thrust upon us - no 
young hand will falter.” 

The author’s attention in his new novel is focussed on the 
upper bourgeois and landlord strata of Poland, then embarked 
on the road to fascism. He was able to finish only the first 
part of this book which introduces an historically true, lifelike 
cast of characters, Bolshevik workers and revolutionary youth 
who lead the working masses in the struggle with the White 
Poles backed, once again, by American-British and French 
imperialism. 

Patriotism and proletarian internationalism, loyalty to the 
banner of Lenin and heroic courage distinguish the behaviour 
of the elder generation of revolutionaries as represented by 
Sigismund Raewski and the Bolshevik workers who lead the 
rising. 


18 


It is safe to presume that the life story of Andrei Ptakha, the 
most memorable of the book’s characters, would have served 
to illustrate the formation of a Bolshevik, the birth of a New 
Man. 

Death interfered with the plans of the Bolshevik writer. Nikolai 
Ostrovsky died on December 22, 1936, the day the first part of 
his second and last novel, Bom of the Storm, appeared. 

“What can be finer than for a man to continue to serve 
mankind even when he is no more,” Nikolai Ostrovsky said. 

The writings of this Bolshevik novelist, his ardent articles 
and the speeches he made to the youth are to this day a 
valuable contribution to the struggle of the peoples of the world 
for peace, for creative labour, for popular democracy - for 
human happiness. 


N. Vengrov 


19 


tfcrw tj-ct steel y^sAs tempered 


Tart One 


20 


CHAPTER ONE 


T hose of you who came to my house to be examined before the 
Easter holidays, stand up!” 

The speaker, a corpulent man in the garb of a priest, with a heavy 
cross dangling from his neck, fixed the class with a baleful glare. 

His small hard eyes seemed to bore through the six children - four 
boys and two girls - who rose from their seats and looked at the man 
in the cassock with apprehension. 

“You sit down,” the priest said, motioning to the girls. 

The girls hastily complied, with sighs of relief. 

Father Vasili’s slits of eyes focussed on the other four. 

“Now then, my fine lads, come over here!” 

Father Vasili rose, pushed back his chair and walked up to the 
group of boys who stood huddled close together. 

“Which of you young ruffians smokes?” 

“We don’t smoke, father,” the four answered timidly. 

The blood rushed to the priest’s face. 

“You don’t smoke, eh, you scoundrels? Then who put the tobacco 
in the dough? Tell me that! We’ll see whether you smoke or not. Now 
then, turn out your pockets! Come on, turn them out, I say!” 

Three of the boys proceeded to empty the contents of their pockets 
onto the table. 

The priest inspected the seams carefully for grains of tobacco, but 
found nothing, whereupon he turned to the fourth lad, a dark-eyed 
youngster in a grey shirt and blue trousers patched at the knees. 
“What are you standing there for like a dummy?” 

The lad threw a look of silent hatred at his questioner. 

“I haven’t any pockets,” he replied sullenly. 

“No pockets, eh? You think I don’t know who could have played 
such a scoundrelly trick as to spoil my dough? You think I’m going to 
let you off again? Oh no, my boy, you shall suffer for this. Last time I 
allowed you to stay in this school because your mother begged me to 
keep you, but now I’ve finished with you. Out with you!” He seized 


21 


the boy painfully by the ear and threw him out into the corridor, 
slamming the door after him. 

The class sat silent, cowed. None of the children could understand 
why Pavel Korchagin had been expelled, none but Sergei Bruzzhak, 
who was Pavel’s closest friend. He had seen him sprinkle a fistful 
of home-grown tobacco into the Easter cake dough in the priest’s 
kitchen where six backward pupils had waited for the priest to come 
and hear them repeat their lesson. 

Now the ejected Pavel sat down on the bottom step of the 
schoolhouse and wondered dismally what his mother would say 
when he told her what had happened, his poor hardworking mother 
who toiled from morning till night as cook at the excise inspector’s. 

Tears choked him. 

“What shall I do? It’s all because of that damned priest. What 
on earth made me go and put that tobacco in his dough. It was 
Seryozhka’s idea. ‘Let’s play a trick on the old beast,’ he says. So we 
did. And now Seryozhka’s got off and I’ll likely be kicked out.” 

His feud with Father Vasili was of long standing. It dated back to 
the day he had a scrap with Mishka Levchukov and in punishment 
was kept in after lessons. To keep the lad out of mischief in the empty 
classroom, the teacher took him to the second grade to sit in at a 
lesson. 

Pavel took a seat at the back. The teacher, a wizened little man in 
a black jacket, was telling the class about the earth and the heavenly 
bodies, and Pavel gaped with amazement when he learned that the 
earth had been in existence for millions of years and that the stars too 
were worlds. So startled was he by what he had heard that he barely 
refrained from getting up and blurting out: “But that isn’t what the 
Bible says!” But he was afraid of getting into more hot water. 

The priest had always given Pavel full marks for Scripture. He 
knew almost the whole prayer book practically by heart, and the Old 
and New Testament as well. He knew exactly what God had created 
on each day of the week. Now he resolved to take the matter up with 
Father Vasili. At the very next lesson, before the priest had time to 


22 


settle himself properly in his chair, Pavel raised his hand and, having 
obtained permission to speak, he got up. 

“Father, why does the teacher in the second grade say the earth is 
millions of years old, instead of what the Bible says, five thou...” A 
hoarse cry from Father Vasili cut him short. 

“What did you say, you scoundrel? So that’s how you leam your 
Scripture!” 

And before Pavel knew what had happened the priest had seized 
him by the ears and was banging his head against the wall. A few 
minutes later, shaken with fright and pain, he found himself outside 
in the corridor. 

His mother too had given him a good scolding that time. And the 
following day she had gone to the school and begged Father Vasili to 
take him back. 

From that day Pavel hated the priest with all his soul. Hated and 
feared him. His childish heart rebelled against any injustice, however 
slight. He could not forgive the priest for the undeserved beating, and 
he grew sullen and bitter. 

Pavel suffered many a slight at the hands of Father Vasili after 
that. The priest was forever sending him out of the classroom; 
day after day for weeks on end he made him stand in the corner 
for trifling misdemeanours and never called on him to answer 
questions, with the result that on the eve of the Easter holidays 
Pavel had to go with the backward boys to the priest’s house to be 
re-examined. It was there in the kitchen that he had dropped the 
tobacco into the dough. 

No one had seen him do it, yet the priest had guessed at once who 
was to blame. 

The lesson ended at last and the children poured out into the yard 
and crowded round Pavel, who maintained a gloomy silence. Sergei 
Bruzzhak lingered behind in the classroom. He felt that he too was 
guilty, but he could do nothing to help his friend. 

Yefrem Vasilievich, the head master, poked his head out of the 
open window of the teachers’ room and shouted: 


23 


“Send Korchagin to me at once!” Pavel jumped at the sound of 
the Head’s deep bass voice, and with pounding heart obeyed his 
summons. 

The proprietor of the railway station restaurant, a pale middle- 
aged man with faded, colourless eyes, glanced briefly at Pavel. 

“How old is he?” 

“Twelve.” 

“All right, he can stay. He’ll get eight roubles a month and his 
food on the days he works. He’ll work twenty-four hours at a stretch 
every other day. But mind, no pilfering.” 

“Oh no, sir. He won’t steal, I’ll answer for that,” the mother 
hastened fearfully to assure him. 

“Let him start in today,” ordered the proprietor and, turning to the 
woman behind the counter, paid: “Zina, take the boy to the kitchen 
and tell Frosya to put him to work instead of Grishka.” 

The barmaid laid down the knife with which she had been slicing 
ham, nodded to Pavel and led the way across the hall to a side door 
opening into the scullery. Pavel followed her. His mother hurried 
after him and whispered quickly into his ear: “Now Pavlushka, dear, 
do your best, and don’t disgrace yourself.” 

With sad eyes she watched him go, and left. 

Work in the scullery was in full swing; plates, forks and kn ives 
were piled high on the table and several women were drying them 
with towels flung over their shoulders. A boy with a shaggy mop of 
red hair, slightly older than Pavel, was tending two huge samovars. 

The scullery was full of steam that rose from the large vat of 
boiling water in which the dishes were washed, and Pavel could not 
see the faces of the women at first. He stood waiting uncertainly for 
someone to tell him what to do. 

Zina, the barmaid, went over to one of the dishwashers and 
touched her shoulder. 

“Here, Frosya, I’ve brought you a new boy to take Grishka’s 
place. You tell him what he’s to do.” 

“She’s in charge here,” Zina said to Pavel, nodding toward the 


24 



25 




woman she had called Frosya. “She’ll tell you what you have to do.” 
And with that she turned and went back to the buffet. 

“All right,” Pavel replied softly and looked questioningly at 
Frosya. Wiping her perspiring brow she examined him critically from 
head to foot as if sizing him up, then, rolling up her sleeve which had 
slipped over her elbow, she said in a deep and remarkably pleasant 
voice: 

“It’s not much of a job, dearie, but it will keep you busy enough. 
That copper over there has to be heated in the morning and kept hot 
so there’s boiling water all the time; then there’s the wood to chop and 
me samovars to take care of besides. You’ll have to clean the kn ives 
and forks sometimes and carry out the slops. There’ll be plenty to do, 
lad,” she said, speaking with a marked Kostroma accent laying the 
stress on the “a’s.” Her manner of speaking and her flushed face with 
the small tumed-up nose made Pavel feel better. 

“She seems quite decent,” he concluded, and overcoming his 
shyness he said: “What am I to do now, Auntie?” 

A burst of loud laughter from the dishwashers met his words. 

“Ha! Ha! Frosya’s gone and got herself a nephew...” 

Frosya herself laughed even more heartily than the others. 

Through the cloud of steam Pavel had not noticed that Frosya was 
a young girl; she was no more than eighteen. 

Covered with confusion, he turned to the boy and asked: 

“What am I supposed to do now?” 

But the boy merely chuckled. “You ask Auntie, she’ll tell you all 
about it. I’m off.” Whereupon he darted through the door leading to 
the kitchen. 

“Come over here and help dry the forks,” one of the dishwashers, 
a middle-aged woman, called. 

“Stop your cackling,” she admonished the others. “The lad didn’t 
say anything to laugh at. Here, take this,” she handed Pavel a dish 
towel. “Hold one end between your teeth and pull it tight by the other. 
Here’s a fork, run the towel back and forth between the prongs, and 
see you don’t leave any dirt. They’re very strict about that here. The 


26 


customers always inspect the forks and if they find a speck of dirt, 
they make a terrible fuss, and the mistress will send you flying out in 
a jiffy.” 

“The mistress?” Pavel echoed. “I thought the master who hired me 
was in charge.” 

The dishwasher laughed. 

“The master, my lad, is just a stick of furniture around here. The 
mistress is the boss. She isn’t here today. But if you work here a while 
you’ll see for yourself.” 

The scullery door opened and three waiters entered carrying trays 
piled high with dirty dishes. 

One of them, a broad-shouldered cross-eyed man with a heavy, 
square jaw, said: “You’d better put on a little speed. The 12 o’clock is 
due any minute, and here you are dawdling about.” 

He looked at Pavel. “Who’s this?” he asked. 

“That’s the new boy,” said Frosya. 

“Ah, the new boy,” he said. “Well, listen, my lad,” he laid his heavy 
hand on Pavel’s shoulders and pushed him over to the samovars. 
“You’re supposed to keep them boiling all the time, and look, one of 
them’s out, and the other is barely going. We’ll let it pass today, but 
if it happens again tomorrow, you’ll get your face pushed in, see?” 
Pavel busied himself with the samovars without a word. ! 

Thus began his life of toil. Never had Pavka exerted himself as 
much as on that first day at work. He realized that this was not home 
where he could afford to disobey his mother. The cross-eyed waiter 
had made it quite plain that if he did not do as he was told, he would 
suffer for it. 

Placing one of his top-boots over the chimney and using it as a 
bellows, Pavel soon had the sparks flying from the large potbellied 
samovars. He picked up the slop pail and rushed out to the garbage 
dump, added firewood to the water boiler, dried the wet dish towels 
on the hot samovars - in a word, did everything he was told to do. 
Late that night when the weary Pavel went down to the kitchen, 
Anisia, the middle-aged dishwasher, with a glance at the door that 


27 


had closed behind him, remarked: “Something queer about that boy, 
look at the way he dashes about like mad. Must have been a good 
reason for putting him to work.” 

“He’s a good worker,” said Frosya. “Needs no speeding up.” 

“He’ll soon cool off,” was Lusha’s opinion. “They all try hard in 
the beginning...” 

At seven o’clock the next morning, Pavel, utterly exhausted after 
a whole night spent on his feet, turned the boiling samovars over to 
the boy who was to relieve him. The latter, a puffy-faced youngster 
with an ugly glint in his eyes, examined the boiling samovars, 
and having assured himself that all was in order, thrust his hands 
into his pockets and spat through his teeth with an air of scornful 
superiority. 

“Now listen, snotnose!” he said in an aggressive tone, fixing 
Pavel with his colourless eye? “See you’re on the job here tomorrow 
at six sharp.” 

“Why at six?” Pavka wanted to kn ow. “The shift changes at seven, 
doesn’t it?” 

“Never mind when the shift changes. You get here at six. And 
you’d better not blab too much or I’ll smash your silly mug for you. 
Some cheek, only started in today and already putting on airs.” 

The dishwashers who had just finished their shift listened with 
interest to the exchange between the two boys. The blustering tone 
and bullying manner of the other enraged Pavel. He took a step 
toward his tonnentor and was about to lash out at him with his fists 
when the fear of losing his newly-acquired job stopped him. 

“Stop your noise,” he said, his face dark with rage, “and keep 
off or you’ll get more than you bargained for. I’ll be here at seven 
tomorrow, and I can use my fists as good as you can. Maybe you’d 
like to try? I’m game.” 

His adversary cowered back against the boiler, gaping with 
surprise at the bristling Pavel. He had not expected such a determined 
rebuff. 

“All right, all right, we’ll see,” he muttered. 


28 


Pavel, his first day at work having passed without mishap, hurried 
home with a sense of having honestly earned his rest. Now he too was 
a worker and no one could accuse him of being a parasite. 

The morning sun was already climbing above the sprawling 
buildings of the sawmill. Before long the tiny house where Pavel 
lived would come into view, just behind the Leszczinski garden. 

“Mother must have just got up, and here I am coming home from 
work,” Pavel thought, and he quickened his pace, whistling as he 
went. “It turned out not so bad being kicked out of school. That 
damned priest wouldn’t have given me any peace anyway, and now 
he can go to hell for all I care,” Pavel reflected as he approached the 
house and opened the gate. “As for that ginger-head I’ll punch his 
face for certain.” 

His mother, who was busy firing the samovar in the yard, looked 
up at her son’s approach and asked anxiously: 

“Well, how was it?” 

“Fine,” Pavel replied. 

His mother was about to say something when through the open 
window Pavel caught a glimpse of his brother Artem’s broad back. 

“So Artem’s here?” he asked anxiously. 

“Yes, he came last night. He’s going to stay here and work at the 
railway yards.” 

With some hesitation he opened the front door. 

The man seated at the table with his back to the door turned his 
huge frame as Pavel entered and the eyes under the thick black brows 
wore a stern look. 

“Ah, here comes the tobacco lad. Well, how goes it?” 

Pavel dreaded the forthcoming interview. 

“Artem knows all about it already,” he thought. 

“I’m in for a good row and a hiding to boot.” Pavel stood somewhat 
in awe of his elder brother. 

But Artem evidently had no intention of chastising the lad. He sat 
on a stool, leaning his elbows on the table and studied Pavel’s face 
with a mingled expression of amusement and scorn. 


29 


“So you’ve graduated from university, eh? Learned all there is to 
leam and now you’re busying yourself with slops, eh?” 

Pavel stared down at a crack in the floor, scrutinizing the head of a 
nail. Artem got up from the table and went out into the kitchen. 

“Looks as if I won’t get a thrashing after all,” 

Pavel thought with a sigh of relief. 

Later on at tea Artem questioned Pavel about the incident at 
school. Pavel told him all that had happened. 

“What will become of you if you grow up to be such a scamp,” the 
mother said sadly. “What shall we do with him? Who does he take 
after, I wonder? Dear God, to think of all I’ve had to suffer from that 
boy,” she complained. 

Artem pushed his empty cup away and turned to Pavel. 

“Now listen to me, mate,” he said. “What’s done can’t be undone. 
Only now take care and do your work properly and no monkey 
business, because if you get yourself kicked out of this place I’ll give 
you a proper thrashing. Remember that. You’ve given mother enough 
trouble as it is. You’re always getting into some sort of mess. But 
that’s got to stop. When you’ve worked for a year or thereabouts I’ll 
try and get you taken on at the depot as an apprentice, because you’ll 
never amount to anything if you mess about with slops all your life. 
You’ve got to learn a trade. You’re a bit too young just now, but in 
a year’s time I’ll see what I can do, maybe they’ll take you. I’ll be 
working here now. Ma won’t need to go out to work any more. She’s 
slaved enough for all sorts of swine. Only see here, Pavka, you’ve 
got to be a man.” 

He stood up, his huge frame dwarfing all about him, and putting 
on the jacket that hung over the chair, said to his mother: “I’ve got 
to go out for an hour or so,” and went out, stooping a little in the 
doorway. 

Passing by the window on his way to the gate he looked in and 
called out to Pavel: “I’ve brought you a pair of boots and a knife. 
Mother will give them to you.” 


30 


The station restaurant was open day and night. 

Six different railway lines met at this junction, and the station was 
always packed with people; only for two or three hours at night during 
a gap between trains was the place comparatively quiet. Hundreds of 
trains passed through this station in all directions. Trains on their 
way from one section of the front to another, trains bringing back 
thousands of maimed and crippled men, and taking away a constant 
stream of new men in monotonous grey overcoats. 

Pavel worked there for two years - two years in which he saw 
nothing more than the scullery and kitchen. The twenty odd people 
employed in the huge basement kitchen worked at a feverish pace. 
Ten waiters scurried constantly back and forth between the restaurant 
and the kitchen. 

By now Pavel was receiving ten roubles instead of eight. He had 
grown taller and broader in these two years, and many were the trials 
that fell to his lot. For half a year he had worked as a kitchen boy 
but had been sent back to the scullery again; the all-powerful chef 
had taken a dislike to him - you never knew but what the unruly cub 
might stick a knife into you if you boxed his ears too often. Indeed 
Pavel’s fiery temper would have lost him the job long since had it not 
been for his tremendous capacity for hard work. For he could work 
harder than anyone else and he never seemed to get tired. 

During rush hours he would dash with loaded trays up and down 
the kitchen stairs like a whirlwind, taking four or five steps at a 
time. 

At night, when the hubbub in both halls of the restaurant subsided, 
the waiters would gather downstairs in the kitchen storerooms and 
wild, reckless card games would begin. On more than one occasion 
Pavel saw ba nkn otes of large denomination change hands. He was 
not surprised to see so much money lying about for he knew that each 
waiter received between thirty and forty roubles a shift in rouble and 
half rouble tips, which they spent later in drinking and gambling. 
Pavel hated them. 

“The damned swine!” he thought. “There’s Artem, a first class 


31 


mechanic, and all he gets is forty-eight roubles a month, and I get ten. 
And they rake in all that money in one day. And just for carrying trays 
back and forth. And then they spend it all on drink and cards.” 

To Pavel the waiters were as alien and hostile as his employers. 
“They crawl on their bellies here, the pigs, but their wives and sons 
strut about town like rich folk.” 

Sometimes they brought their sons wearing smart Gymnasium 
uniforms, and sometimes their wives, plump and soft with good 
living. “I bet they have more money than the gentry they serve,” 
Pavel thought. Nor was the lad shocked any longer by what went on 
at night in the dark corners of the kitchen or in the storerooms. He 
knew very well that no dishwasher or barmaid would hold her job 
long if she did not sell herself for a few roubles to those who held the 
whip hand here. 

Pavel had a glimpse of the bottommost depths of life, the very 
sump of its ugly pit, and from it a musty, mouldy stench, the smell 
of swamp rot, was wafted up to him who so eagerly reached out for 
everything new and unexplored. 

Artem failed to get his brother taken on as an apprentice at the 
railway yards; they would not have anyone under fifteen. But Pavel 
was drawn to the huge soot-blackened brick building, and he looked 
forward to the day when he could get away from the restaurant. 

He went to see Artem at the yards frequently, and would go with 
him to look over the cars, helping him whenever he could. 

He felt particularly lonely after Frosya left. With the gay, laughing 
girl gone, Pavel felt more keenly than ever how strong his friendship 
with her had grown. Now as he came in the morning to the scullery 
and listened to the shrill quarrelling of the refugee women he felt a 
gnawing sense of emptiness and solitude. One night as he fired the 
boiler he squatted in front of the open firebox and stared squinting 
at the flames, revelling in the heat of the stove. He was alone in the 
scullery. 

Involuntarily he fell to thinking of Frosya, and a scene he had 
recently witnessed rose before his mind’s eye. 


32 


During the night interval on Saturday Pavel was on his way 
downstairs to the kitchen, when curiosity prompted him to climb 
onto a pile of firewood to look into the storeroom on the lower 
landing where the gamblers usually assembled. 

The game was in full swing. Zalivanov, flushed with excitement, 
was keeping the bank. 

Just then footsteps sounded on the stairs. Looking around, Pavel 
saw Prokhoshka coming down, and he slipped under the staircase to 
let the man pass into the kitchen. It was dark there under the stairs 
and Prokhos hk a could not see him. 

As Prokhoshka passed the turning in the stairs, Pavel caught a 
glimpse of his broad back and huge head. Just then someone else 
came hurrying lightly down the steps after the waiter and Pavel heard 
a familiar voice call out: 

“Prokhoshka, wait!” 

Prokhoshka stopped and turned around to look up the stairway. 

“What d’you want?” he growled. 

The footsteps pattered down and soon Frosya came into sight. 

She seized the waiter by the ami and spoke in a broken, 
choking voice. 

“Where’s the money the Lieutenant gave you, Prokhoshka?” 

The man wrenched his arm away from the girl. 

“What money? I gave it to you, didn’t I?” his tone was sharp and 
vicious. 

“But he gave you three hundred roubles,” Frosya’s voice broke 
into muffled sobs. 

“Did he now? Three hundred!” Prokhoshka sneered. “Want to get 
it all, eh? Flying high for a dishwasher, aren’t you, my fine young 
lady? The fifty I gave you is plenty. Girls a damn sight better than 
you, educated too, don’t take that much. You ought to be thankful for 
what you got - fifty roubles clear for a night is damn good. Alright, 
I’ll give you another ten, maybe twenty, that’s all - and if you’re not a 
fool you can earn some more. I can help you.” With this Pro kh oshka 
spun around and disappeared into the kitchen. 


33 


“Scoundrel! Swine!” Frosya screamed after him and, leaning 
against the woodpile, sobbed bitterly. 

Words cannot convey the emotion that seized Pavel as he stood in 
the darkness under the staircase watching Frosya convulsively beat 
her head against the logs of wood. But he did not show himself; only 
his fingers spasmodically gripped the cast-iron supports of the stair. 

“So they’ve sold her too, damn them! Oh Frosya, Frosya...” 

His hatred for Prokhoshka seared deeper than ever and everything 
around him was revolting and hateful to him. “If I had the strength 
I’d beat the scoundrel to death! Why am I not big and strong like 
Artem?” 

The flames under the boiler flared up and died down, their trembling 
red tongues intertwining into a long bluish spiral; it seemed to Pavel 
that some jeering, mocking imp was showing its tongue at him. 

It was quiet in the room; only the fire crackled and the tap dripped 
at measured intervals. 

Klimka put the last pot, scrubbed until it shone, on the shelf and 
wiped his hands. There was no one else in the kitchen. The cook on 
duty and the kitchen help were asleep in the cloakroom. Quiet settled 
over the kitchen for the three night hours, and these hours Klimka 
always spent upstairs with Pavel, for a Ann friendship had sprung up 
between the young kitchen boy and the dark-eyed boiler attendant. 
Upstairs, Klimka found Pavel squatting in front of the open firebox. 
Pavel saw the shadow of the familiar shaggy figure cast against the 
wall and said without turning around: 

“Sit down, Klimka.” 

The boy climbed onto the wood pile, stretched out on it and looked 
at the silent Pavel. 

“Trying to tell your fortune in the fire?” he asked, smiling. 

Pavel tore his gaze away from the licking tongues of flame and 
turned on Klimka two large shining eyes brimming with unspoken 
sadness. Klimka had never seen his friend look so sad. 

“What’s wrong with you today, Pavel?” After a pause he asked: 
“Anything happened?” 


34 


Pavel got up and sat next to Klimka. 

“Nothing’s happened,” he replied in a low voice. “Only it’s hard 
for me here, Klimka.” And his hands resting on his knees clenched 
into fists. 

“What’s come over you today?” Klimka insisted, propping himself 
up on his elbows. 

“Today? It’s been like this ever since I got this job. Just look at 
this place! We work like horses and instead of tha nk s we get blows 
- anyone can beat you and there’s nobody to stick up for you. The 
masters hire us to serve them, but anyone who’s strong enough has 
the right to beat us. After all, you can run yourself ragged but you’ll 
never please everybody and those you can’t please always have it in 
for you. No matter how you try to do everything right, so that nobody 
could find fault, there’s always bound to be somebody you haven’t 
served fast enough, and then you get it in the neck just the same...” 

“Don’t shout like that”, Klimka interrupted him, frightened. 
“Somebody might walk in and hear you.” 

Pavel leapt to his feet. 

“Let them hear, I’m going to quit anyway. I’d rather shovel snow 
than hang around this ... this hole full of crooks. Look at all the money 
they’ve got! They treat us like dirt, and do what they like with the 
girls. The decent girls who won’t do what they want are kicked out, 
and starving refugees who have no place to go are taken on instead. 
And that sort hang on Ie here at least they get something to eat, and 
they’re so down and out they’ll do anything for a piece of bread.” 

He spoke with such passion that Klimka, fearing that someone 
might overhear, sprang up to close the door leading to the kitchen, 
while Pavel continued to pour out the bitterness that was overflowing 
in his soul. 

“And you, Klimka, take the beatings lying down. Why don’t you 
ever speak up?” 

Pavel dropped onto a stool at the table and rested his head wearily 
on the palm of his hand. Klimka threw some wood into the fire and 
also sat down at the table. 


35 


“Aren’t we going to read today?” he asked Pavel. 

“There’s nothing to read,” Pavel replied. “The bookstall’s 
closed.” 

“Why should it be closed today?” Klimka wondered. 

“The gendarmes picked up the bookseller. Found something on 
him,” Pavel replied. 

“Picked him up? What for?” 

“For politics, they say.” 

Klimka stared at Pavel, unable to grasp his meaning. 

“Politics. What’s that?” 

Pavel shrugged his shoulders. 

“The devil knows! They say it’s politics when you go against the 
tsar.” 

Klimka looked startled. 

“Do people do that sort of thing?” 

“I dunno,” replied Pavel. 

The door opened and Glasha, her eyes puffed from sleepiness, 
walked into the scullery. 

“Why aren’t you two sleeping? There’s time for an hour’s nap 
before the train pulls in. You’d better take a rest, Pavka, I’ll see to the 
boiler for you.” 

Pavel quit his job sooner than he expected and in a manner he had 
no foreseen. 

One frosty January day when Pavel had finished his shift and 
was ready to go home he found that the young man who was to 
relieve him had not shown up. Pavel went to the proprietor’s wife 
and announced that he was going nevertheless, but she would not 
hear of it. There was nothing for him to do but to carry on, exhausted 
though he was after a day and night of work. By evening he was 
ready to drop with weariness. During the night interval he had to fill 
the boilers and bring them to the boil in time for the three o’clock 
train. 

Pavel turned the tap but there was no water; the pump evidently 


36 


was not working. Leaving the tap open, he lay down on the woodpile; 
but fatigue got the better of him, and he was soon fast asleep. 

A few minutes later the tap began gurgling and hissing and the 
water poured into the boiler, filling it to overflowing and spilling over 
the tiled floor of the scullery which was deserted as usual at this hour. 
The water flowed on until it covered the floor and seeped under the 
door into the restaurant. 

Puddles of water gathered under the bags and portmanteaus of the 
dozing passengers, but nobody noticed it until the water reached a 
passenger lying on the floor and he jumped to his feet with a shout. 
There was a rush for luggage and a terrific uproar broke out. 

And the water continued to pour in. 

Prokhoshka, who had been clearing the tables in the second hall, 
ran in when he heard the commotion. Leaping over the puddles he 
made a dash for the door and pushed it open violently. The water 
dammed behind it burst into the hall. 

There was more shouting. The waiters on duty rushed into the 
scullery. Pro kh oshka threw himself on the sleeping Pavel. 

Blows rained down on the boy’s head, stunning him. 

Still half asleep, he had no idea of what was happening. He was 
only conscious of blinding flashes of lightning before his eyes and 
agonizing pain shooting through his body. Pavel was so badly beaten 
that he barely managed to drag himself home. 

In the morning Artem, grimfaced and scowling, questioned his 
brother as to what had happened. 

Pavel told him everything. 

“Who beat you?” Artem asked hoarsely. 

“Prokhoshka.” 

“All right, now lie still.” 

Without another word Artem pulled on his jacket and walked out. 

“Where can I find Prokhor, the waiter,” he asked one of the 
dishwashers. Glasha looked at the stranger in workingman’s clothes 
who stood before her. 

“He’ll be here in a moment,” she replied. 


37 


The man leaned his enormous bulk against the doorjamb. 

“All right, I can wait.” 

Prokhor, carrying a mountain of dishes on a tray, kicked the door 
open and entered the scullery. 

“That’s him,” Glasha nodded at the waiter. 

Artem took a step forward and laying a heavy hand on Prokhor’s 
shoulder looked him straight in the eye. 

“What did you beat up my brother Pavka for?” 

Prokhor tried to shake his shoulder loose, but a smashing blow 
laid him out on the floor; he tried to rise, but a second blow more 
terrible than the first pinned him down. 

The terror-stricken dishwashers scattered on all sides. 

Artem spun around and headed for the exit. 

Prokhos hk a sprawled on the floor, his battered face bleeding. 

That evening Artem did not come home from the railway yards. 

His mother learned that he was being held by the gendarmes. 

Six days later Artem returned late at night when his mother was 
already asleep. He went up to Pavel, who was sitting up in bed, and 
said gently: 

“Feeling better, boy?” Artem sat down next to Pavel. “Might have 
been worse.” After a moment’s silence he added: “Never mind, you’ll 
go to work at the electric station; I’ve spoken to them about you. 
You’ll leam a real trade there.” 

Pavel seized Artem’s powerful hand with both of his. 


CHAPTER TWO 


L ike a whirlwind the stupendous news broke into the small 
town: “The tsar’s been overthrown! ” 

The townsfolk refused to believe it. 

From a train that crawled into the station in a blizzard two students 
in army greatcoats and with rifles slung over their shoulders and a 


38 


detachment of revolutionary soldiers wearing red armbands tumbled 
out onto the platfonn and arrested the station gendarmes, an old 
colonel and the chief of the garrison. Now the townsfolk believed the 
news. Thousands streamed down the snowbound streets to the town 
square. 

Eagerly they drank in words they had not known before: liberty, 
equality and fraternity. 

Turbulent days followed, days full of excitement and jubilation. 
Then a lull set in, and the red flag flying over the town hall where the 
Mensheviks and adherents of the Bund had ensconced themselves 
was the sole reminder of the change that had taken place. Everything 
else remained as before. 

Towards the end of the winter a regiment of the cavalry guards was 
billeted in the town. In the mornings they sallied out in squadrons to 
hunt for deserters from the South-western Front at the railway 
station. 

The troopers were great, beefy fellows with well-fed faces. Most 
of their officers were counts and princes; they wore golden shoulder 
straps and silver piping on their breeches, just as they had in the tsar’s 
time - for all the world as if there had been no revolution. 

For Pavel, Klimka and Sergei Bruzzhak nothing had changed. The 
bosses were still there. It was not until November that something out 
of the ordinary began to happen. People of a new kind had appeared at 
the station and were beginning to stir things up; a steadily increasing 
number of them were soldiers from the firing lines and they bore the 
strange name of “Bolsheviks.” 

Where that firm and weighty word came from no one knew. 

The guardsmen found it increasingly hard to detain the deserters. 
The crackle of rifles and the splintering of glass was heard more 
and more often down at the station. The men came from the front 
in groups and when stopped they fought back with bayonets. In the 
beginning of December they began pouring in by trainloads. 

The guardsmen came down in force to the station with the 


39 


intention of holding the soldiers, but they found themselves raked by 
machinegun fire. The men who poured out of the railway cars were 
inured to death. 

The grey-coated front-liners drove the guards back into the town 
and then returned to the station to continue on their way, trainload 
after trainload. 

One day in the spring of nineteen eighteen, three chums on their 
way from Sergei Bruzzhak’s where they had been playing cards 
dropped into the Korchagin garden and threw themselves on the 
grass. They were bored. All the customary occupations had begun 
to pall, and they were beginning to rack their brains for some more 
exciting way to spend the day when they heard the clatter of horses’ 
hoofs behind them and saw a horseman come galloping down the 
road. With one bound the horse cleared the ditch between the road 
and the low garden fence and the rider waved his whip at Pavel and 
Klim. 

“Hi there, my lads, come over here!” 

Pavel and Klim sprang to their feet and ran to the fence. The rider 
was covered with dust; it had settled in a heavy grey layer on the 
cap which he wore pushed to the back of his head, and on his khaki 
blouse and breeches. A revolver and two German grenades dangled 
from his heavy soldier’s belt. 

“Can you get me a drink of water, boys?” the horseman asked 
them. While Pavel dashed off into the house for the water, he turned 
to Sergei who was staring at him. “Tell me, boy, who’s in authority 
in your town?” 

Sergei breathlessly related all the local news to the newcomer. 

“There’s been nobody in authority for two weeks. 

The home-guard’s the government now. All the inhabitants take 
turns patrolling the town at night. And who might you be?” Sergei 
asked in his turn. 

“Now, now - if you know too much you’ll get old too soon,” the 
horseman smiled. 


40 



41 











Pavel ran out of the house carrying a mug of water. 

The rider thirstily emptied the mug at one gulp and handed it back 
to Pavel. Then jerking the reins he started off at a gallop, heading for 
the pinewoods. 

“Who was that?” Pavel asked Klim. 

“How do I know?” the latter replied, shrugging his shoulders. 

“Looks like the authorities are going to be changed again. That’s 
why the Leszczinskis left yesterday. And if the rich are on the run 
that means the partisans are coming,” declared Sergei, settling the 
political question firmly and with an air of finality. 

The logic of this was so convincing that both Pavel and Klim 
agreed with him at once. 

Before the boys had finished discussing the question a clatter of 
hoofs from the highway sent all three rushing back to the fence. 

Over by the forest warden’s cottage, which was barely visible 
among the trees, they saw men and carts emerging from the woods, 
and nearer still on the highway a party of fifteen or so mounted 
men with rifles across their pommels. At the head of the horsemen 
rode an elderly man in khaki jacket and officer’s belt with field 
glasses slung on his chest, and beside him the man the boys had 
just spoken to. The elderly man wore a red ribbon on the front of 
his chest. 

“What did I tell you?” Sergei nudged Pavel in the ribs. “See the 
red ribbon? Partisans. I’ll be damned if they aren’t partisans....” And 
whooping with joy he leapt over the fence into the street. 

The others followed suit and all three stood by the roadside gazing 
at the approaching horsemen. 

When the riders were quite close the man whom the boys had met 
before nodded to them, and pointing to the Leszczinski house with 
his whip asked: 

“Who lives over there?” 

Pavel paced alongside trying to keep abreast the rider. 

“Leszczinski the lawyer. He ran away yesterday. Must have been 
scared of you...” 


42 


“How do you know who we are?” the elderly man asked, 
smiling. 

“What about that?” Pavel pointed to the ribbon. “Anybody can 
tell...” 

People poured into the street to stare with curiosity at the 
detachment entering the town. Our three young friends too stood 
watching the dusty, exhausted Red Guards go by. And when the 
detachment’s lone cannon and the carts with machine guns clattered 
over the cobblestones the boys trailed after the partisans, and did not 
go home until after the unit had halted in the centre of the town and 
the billeting began. 

That evening four men sat around the massive carved-legged 
table in the spacious Leszczinski parlour: detachment commander 
Comrade Bulgakov, an elderly man whose hair was touched with 
grey, and three members of the unit’s commanding personnel. 

Bulgakov had spread out a map of the gubernia on the table and 
was now running his finger over it. 

“You say that we ought to put up a stand here, Comrade 
Yermachenko,” he said, addressing the man with prominent 
cheekbones and strong teeth facing him, “but I think we must move 
out in the morning. 

“Better still if we could get going during the night, but the men 
are in need of a rest. Our task is to withdraw to Kazatin before the 
Germans get there. To resist with the strength we have would be 
ridiculous. One gun with thirty rounds of ammunition, two hundred 
infantry and sixty cavalry. A formidable force, isn’t it, when the 
Germans are advancing in an avalanche of steel. We cannot put up 
a fight until we join up with other withdrawing Red units. Besides, 
Comrade, we must remember that apart from the Germans there’ll 
be numerous counter-revolutionary bands of all kinds to deal with 
en route. I propose that we should withdraw in the morning after 
first blowing up the railway bridge beyond the station. It’ll take the 
Germans two or three days to repair it and in the meantime their 
advance along the railway will be held up. What do you think, 


43 


Comrades? It’s up to us to decide...” he turned to the others around 
the table. 

Struzhkov, who sat diagonally across from Bulgakov, sucked in 
his lips and looked first at the map and then at Bulgakov. 

“I agree with Bulgakov,” he said finally. 

The youngest of the men, who was dressed in a worker’s blouse, 
also concurred. 

“Bulgakov’s right,” he said. 

But Yermachenko, the man who had spoken with the boys earlier 
in the day, shook his head. 

“What the devil did we get the detachment together for? To retreat 
from the Germans without putting up a fight? As I see it, we’ve got 
to have it out with them here. I’m sick and tired of running. If it was 
up to me, I’d fight them here without fail....” Pushing his chair back 
sharply, he rose and began pacing the room. 

Bulgakov looked at him with disapproval. 

“We must use our heads, Yermachenko. We can’t throw our men 
into a battle that is bound to end in defeat and destruction. That would 
be ridiculous. There’s a whole division with heavy artillery and 
armoured cars just behind us... This is no time for schoolboy heroics, 
Comrade Yermachenko...” Turning to the others, he continued: “So 
it’s decided, we evacuate tomorrow morning... Now for the next 
question, liaison,” Bulgakov proceeded. “Since we are the last to 
leave, it’s our job to organise work in the German rear. This is a big 
railway junction and there are two stations in the town. We must 
see to it that there is a reliable comrade to carry on the work on the 
railway. We’ll have to decide here whom to leave behind to get the 
work going. Have you anyone in mind?” 

“I think Fyodor Zhukhrai the sailor ought to remain,” Yermachenko 
said, moving up to the table. “In the first place he’s a local man. 
Secondly, he’s a fitter and mechanic and can get himself a job at the 
station. Nobody’s seen Fyodor with our detachment - he won’t get 
here until tonight. He’s got a good head on his shoulders and he’ll get 
things going properly. I think he’s the most suitable man for the job.” 


44 


Bulgakov nodded. 

“Right. I agree with you, Yermachenko. No objections, 
Comrades?” he turned to the others. “None. Then the matter is 
settled. We’ll leave Zhukhrai some money and the credentials he’ll 
need for his work.... Now for the third and last question, Comrades. 
About the arms stored here in the town. There’s quite a stock of 
rifles, twenty thousand of them, left over from the tsarist war and 
forgotten by everybody. They are piled up in a peasant’s shed. I 
have this from the owner of the shed who happens to be anxious to 
get rid of them. We are not going to leave them to the Germans; in 
my opinion we ought to burn them, and at once, so as to have it over 
and done with by morning. The only trouble is that the fire might 
spread to the surrounding cottages. It’s on the fringes of the town 
where the peasant poor live.” 

Struzhkov stirred in his chair. He was a solidly built man with a 
heavy stubble that had not seen a razor for some time. 

“Why burn the rifles? I would distribute them among the 
population.” 

Bulgakov turned quickly to face him. 

“Distribute them, you say?” 

“A splendid idea!” Yermachenko responded enthusiastically. 
“Give them to the workers and anyone else who wants them. At 
least there will be something to hit back with when the Germans 
make life impossible. They’re bound to do their worst. And when 
things come to a head, the men will be able to take to arms. 
Struzhkov’s right: the rifles must be distributed. Wouldn’t be a bad 
thing to take some to the villages too; the peasants will hide them 
away, and when the Germans begin to requisition everything the 
rifles are sure to come in handy.” 

Bulgakov chuckled. 

“That’s all right, but the Germans are sure to order all firms turned 
in and everybody will obey.” 

“Not everybody,” Yermachenko objected. “Some will but others 
won’t.” 


45 


Bulgakov looked questioningly at the men around the table. 

“I’m for distributing the rifles,” the young worker supported 
Yermachenko and Struzhkov. 

“All right then, it’s decided,” Bulgakov agreed. “That’s all for 
now,” he said, rising from his chair. “We can take a rest till morning. 
When Zhukhrai comes, send him in to me, I want to have a talk with 
him. Yermachenko, you’d better inspect the sentry posts.” 

When the others left, Bulgakov went into the bedroom next to the 
parlour, spread his greatcoat on the mattress and lay down. 

The following morning Pavel was coming home from the electric 
power station where he had been working as a stoker’s helper for a 
year now. 

He saw at once that the town was in the grip of unusual excitement. 
As he went along he met more and more people carrying one or two 
and sometimes even three rifles each. He could not understand what 
was happening and he hurried home as fast as he could. Outside the 
Leszczinski garden he saw his acquaintances of yesterday mounting 
their horses. 

Pavel ran into the house, washed quickly and, learning from his 
mother that Artem had not come home yet, dashed out again and 
hurried over to see Sergei Bruzzhak, who lived on the other side of 
the town. 

Sergei’s father was an engine driver’s helper and had his own tiny 
house and a small piece of land. 

Sergei was out and his mother, a stout, palefaced woman, eyed 
Pavel sourly. 

“The devil knows where he is! He rushed out first thing in 
the morning like one possessed. Said they were giving out rifles 
somewhere, so I suppose that’s where he is. What you snotnosed 
warriors need is a good hiding - you’ve gotten out of hand 
completely. Hardly out of pinafores and already dashing off after 
firearms. You tell the scamp that if he brings a single cartridge into 
this house I’ll skin him alive. Who knows what he’ll be dragging in 


46 


and then I’ll have to answer for it. You’re not going there too, are 
you?” 

But before Sergei’s garrulous mother had finished speaking, Pavel 
was already racing down the street. 

On the highway he met a man carrying a rifle on each shoulder. 
Pavel dashed up to him. 

“Please, uncle, where did you get them?” 

“They’re giving them away over there in Verkhovina.” 

Pavel set out as fast as his legs could carry him. Two streets down 
he collided with a boy who was lugging a heavy infantry rifle with 
bayonet attached. Pavel stopped him. 

“Where’d you get the gun?” 

“Fellows from the detachment were giving them away out there 
opposite the school, but there aren’t any more. All gone. Handed 
them out all night and now only the empty cases are left. This is my 
second one,” the boy declared proudly. 

Pavel was utterly dismayed by the news. 

“Damn it, I should’ve gone straight there,” he thought bitterly. 
“How could I have been caught napping like this?” 

Suddenly an idea struck him. Spinning around he overtook the 
receding hoy in two or three bounds and wrenched the rifle from his 
hands. 

“One’s enough for you. This is going to be mine,” he said in a tone 
that brooked no opposition. 

Infuriated by this robbery in broad daylight, the boy flung himself 
at Pavel, but the latter leapt back and pointed the bayonet at his 
antagonist. 

“Look out or you’ll get hurt!” Pavel shouted. 

The boy burst into tears of sheer vexation and ran away, cursing 
with impotent rage. Pavel, vastly pleased with himself, trotted home. 
Leaping over the fence he ran into the shed, laid his acquisition on 
the crossbeams under the roof, and, whistling gaily, walked into the 
house. 


47 


Lovely are the summer evenings in the Ukraine. In small Ukrainian 
towns like Shepetovka, which are more like villages on the outskirts, 
these calm summer nights lure all the young folk out of doors. You 
will see them in groups and in pairs - on the porches, in the little front 
gardens, or perched on piles of timber lying by the side of the road. 
Their gay laughter and singing echo in the evening stillness. 

The air is heavy and tremulous with the fragrance of flowers. 
There is a faint pinpoint glimmer of stars in the depths of the sky, and 
voices carry far, far away... 

Pavel dearly loved his accordion. He would lay the melodious 
instrument tenderly on his knees and let his nimble fingers run lightly 
up and down the double row of keys. A sighing from the bass, and a 
cascade of rollicking melody would pour forth... 

How can you keep still when the sinuous bellows weave in and 
out and the accordion breathes its warm compelling harmonies. 
Before you know it your feet are answering its urgent summons. Ah 
how good it is to be alive! 

This is a particularly jolly evening. A merry crowd of young folk 
have gathered on the pile of logs outside Pavel’s house. And gayest of 
them all is Galochka, the daughter of the stonemason who lives next 
door to Pavel. Galochka loves to dance and sing with the lads. She 
has a deep velvety contralto. 

Pavel is a wee bit afraid of her. For Galochka has a sharp tongue. 
She sits down beside Pavel and throws her arms around him, laughing 
gaily. 

“What a wonder you are with that accordion!” she says. “It’s a pity 
you’re a bit too young or you’d make me a fine hubby. I adore men 
who play the accordion, my poor heart just melts.” 

Pavel blushes to the roots of his hair - luckily it is too dark for 
anyone to see. He edges away from the vixen but she clings fast to 
him. 

“Now then, dearie, you wouldn’t run away from me, would you? 
A fine sweetheart you are,” she laughs. 

Her firm breast brushes Pavel’s shoulder, and he is strangely 


48 


stirred in spite of himself, and the loud laughter of the others breaks 
the accustomed stillness of the lane. 

“Move up, I haven’t any room to play,” says Pavel giving her 
shoulder a slight push. 

This evokes another roar of laughter, jokes and banter. 

Marusya comes to Pavel’s rescue. “Play something sad, Pavel, 
something that tugs at your heartstrings.” 

Slowly the bellows spread out, gently Pavel’s fingers caress the 
keys and a familiar well-loved tune fills the air. Galina is the first to 
join in, then Marusya, and the others. 

All the boatmen to their cottage 
Gathered on the morrow, 

Oh, ’tis good 

And Oh, ’tis sweet 

Here to sing our sorrow ... 

The vibrant young voices of the singers were carried far away into 
the wooded distances. 

“Pavka!” It was Artem’s voice. 

Pavel compressed the bellows of his accordion and fastened 
the straps. 

“They’re calling me. I’ve got to go.” 

“Oh, play just a little more. What’s your hurry?” Marusya tried to 
wheedle him into staying. 

But Pavel was adamant. 

“Can’t. We’ll have some music tomorrow again, but now I’ve got 
to go. Artem’s calling.” And with that he ran across the street to the 
little house opposite. 

He opened the door and saw two men in the room besides 
Artem: Roman, a friend of Artem’s, and a stranger. They were 
sitting at the table. 

“You wanted me?” Pavel asked. 

Artem nodded to him and turned to the stranger: 


49 


“This is that brother of mine we’ve been talking about.” 

The stranger extended a gnarled hand to Pavel. 

“See here, Pavka,” Artem said to his brother. “You told me the 
electrician at the power plant is ill. Now what I want you to do is to 
find out tomorrow whether they want a good man to take his place. If 
they do you’ll let us know.” 

The stranger interrupted him. 

“No need to do that. I’d rather go with him and speak with the boss 
myself.” 

“Of course they need someone. Today the power plant didn’t work 
simply because Stankovich was sick. 

The boss came around twice - he’d been looking high and low 
for somebody to take his place but couldn’t find anyone. He was 
afraid to start the plant with only a stoker around. The electrician’s 
got the typhus.” 

“That settles it,” the stranger said. “I’H call for you tomorrow and 
we’ll go over there together,” he added addressing Pavel. 

“Good.” 

Pavel’s glance met the calm grey eyes of the stranger who 
was studying him carefully. The firm, steady scrutiny somewhat 
disconcerted him. The newcomer was wearing a grey jacket buttoned 
from top to bottom - it was obviously a tight fit for the seams strained 
on his broad, powerful back. His head and shoulders were joined by 
a muscular, ox-like neck, and his whole frame suggested the sturdy 
strength of an old oak. 

“Goodbye and good luck, Zhukhrai,” Artem said accompanying 
him to the door. “Tomorrow you’ll go along with my brother and get 
fixed up in the job.” 

The Germans entered the town three days after the detachment 
left. Their coming was announced by a locomotive whistle at the 
station which had latterly been quite deserted. 

“The Germans are coming,” the news flashed through the town. 

The town stirred like a disturbed anthill, for although the 


50 


townsfolk had known for some time that the Germans were due, they 
had somehow not quite believed it. And now these terrible Germans 
were not only somewhere on their way, but actually here, in town. 

The townsfolk clung to the protection of their front garden fences 
and wicket gates. They were afraid to venture out into the streets. 

The Germans came, marching single file on both sides of the 
highway; they wore olive-drab uniforms and carried their rifles at 
the ready. Their rifles were tipped with broad knifelike bayonets; 
they wore heavy steel helmets, and carried enormous packs on 
their backs. They came from the station into the town in an endless 
stream, came cautiously, prepared to repel an attack at any moment, 
although no one dreamed of attacking them. 

In front strode two officers, Mausers in hand, and in the centre 
of the road walked the interpreter, a sergeant-major in the Hetman’s 
service wearing a blue Ukrainian coat and a tall fur cap. 

The Germans lined up on the square in the centre of the town. The 
drums rolled. A small crowd of the more venturesome townsfolk 
gathered. The Hetman’s man in the Ukrainian coat climbed onto the 
porch of the chemist’s shop and read aloud an order issued by the 
commandant, Major Korf. 

I hereby order: 

* All citizens of the town are to turn in within 24 
hours any firearms or other lethal weapons in their 
possession. The penalty for violation of this order is death 
by shooting. 

* Martial law is declared in the town and citizens are 
forbidden to appear in the streets after 8 p. m. 

Major Korf Town Commandant. 

The German Kommandantur took up quarters in the building 
formerly used by the town administration and, after the revolution, 
by the Soviet of Workers’ Deputies. At the entrance a sentry was 
posted wearing a parade helmet with an imperial eagle of enormous 


51 


proportions. In the backyard of the same building were storage 
premises for the arms to be turned in by the population. 

All day long weapons were brought in by townsfolk scared by the 
threat of shooting. The adults did not show themselves; the arms were 
delivered by youths and small boys. The Germans detained nobody. 

Those who did not want to come in person dumped their weapons 
out on the road during the night, and in the morning a German patrol 
picked them up, loaded them into an anny cart and hauled them to 
the Kommandantur. 

At one o’clock in the afternoon, when the time limit expired, 
German soldiers began to take stock of their booty: fourteen thousand 
rifles. That meant that six thousand had not been turned in. The 
dragnet searches they conducted yielded very insignificant results. 

At dawn the next morning two railwaymen in whose homes 
concealed rifles had been found were shot at the old Jewish cemetery 
outside the town. 

As soon as he heard of the commandant’s order, Artem hurried 
home. Meeting Pavel in the yard, he took him by the shoulder and 
asked him quietly but firmly: 

“Did you bring any weapons home?” 

Pavel had not intended to say anything about the rifle, but he could 
not lie to his brother and so he made a clean breast of it. 

They went into the shed together. Artem took the rifle down from 
its hiding place on the beams, removed, the bolt and bayonet, and 
seizing the weapon by the barrel swung it with all his might against a 
fence post The butt splintered. What remained of the rifle was thrown 
far away into the waste lot beyond the garden. The bayonet and bolt 
Artem threw into the privy pit. 

When he was finished, Artem turned to his brother. 

“You’re not a baby any more, Pavka, and you ought to know you 
can’t play with guns. You must not bring anything into the house. 
This is dead serious. You might have to pay with your life for that sort 
of thing nowadays. And don’t try any tricks, because if you do bring 


52 


something like that home and they find it I’d be the first to be shot 
- they wouldn’t touch a youngster like you. These are brutal times, 
understand that!” 

Pavel promised. 

As the brothers were crossing the yard to the house, a carriage 
stopped at the Leszczmskis’ gate and the lawyer and his wife and two 
children, Nelly and Victor, got out. 

“So the fine birds have flown back to their nest,” Artem muttered 
angrily. “Now the fun begins, blast them!” He went inside. 

All day long Pavel thought regretfully of the rifle. In the meantime 
his friend Sergei was hard at work in an old, abandoned shed, digging 
a hole in the ground next to the wall. At last the pit was ready. In it 
Sergei deposited three brand-new rifles well wrapped up in rags. He 
had obtained them when the Red Guard detachment distributed arms 
to the people and he did not have the slightest intention of giving 
them up to the Germans. He had laboured hard all night to make sure 
that they were safely hidden. 

He filled up the hole, tramped the earth down level, and then piled 
a heap of refuse on top. Critically reviewing the results of his efforts 
and finding them satisfactory, he took off his cap and wiped the sweat 
off his forehead. 

“Now let them search, and even if they find it, they’ll never know 
who put it there, because the shed is nobody’s anyway.” 

Imperceptibly a friendship sprang up between Pavel and the grim¬ 
faced electrician who had been working a full month now at the 
electric station. 

Zhukhrai showed the stoker’s helper how the dynamo was built 
and how it was run. 

The sailor took a liking to the bright youngster. He frequently 
visited Artem on free days and listened patiently to the mother’s 
tales of domestic woes and worries, especially when she complained 
about her younger boy’s escapades. Thoughtful and serious-minded, 


53 


Zhukhrai had a calming, reassuring effect on Maria Yakovlevna, who 
would forget her troubles and grow more cheerful in his company. 

One day Zhukhrai stopped Pavel as he was passing between the 
high piles of firewood in the power station yard. 

“Your mother tells me you’re fond of a scrap,” he said, smiling. 
‘“He’s as bad as a gamecock’, she says.” Zhukhrai chuckled 
approvingly. “As a matter of fact, it doesn’t hurt to be a fighter, as 
long as you know whom to fight and why.” 

Pavel was not sure whether Zhukhrai was joking or serious. 

“I don’t fight for nothing,” he retorted, “I always fight for what’s 
right and fair.” 

“Want me to teach you to fight properly?” Zhukhrai asked 
unexpectedly. 

“What d’you mean, properly?” Pavel looked at the other in 
surprise. 

“You’ll see.” 

And Pavel was given a brief introductory lecture on boxing. 

Proficiency in this art did not come easy to Pavel. Time and again 
he found himself rolling on the ground, kn ocked off his feet by a 
blow from Zhukhrai’s fist, but for all that he proved a diligent and 
patient pupil. 

One warm day after he had returned from Klimka’s place and 
fidgeted about in his room for a while wondering what to do with 
himself, Pavel decided to climb up to his favourite spot - the 
roof of a shed that stood in the corner of the garden behind the 
house. He crossed the backyard into the garden, went over to the 
clapboard shack, and climbed up onto its roof. Pushing through 
the dense branches of the cherry trees that hung over the shed, he 
made his way to the centre of the roof and lay down to bask in the 
sunshine. 

One side of the shed jutted out into the Leszczinski garden, and 
from the end of the roof the whole garden and one side of the house 
were visible. Poking his head over the edge Pavel could see part of 
the yard and a carriage standing there. The batman of the German 


54 


Lieutenant quartered at the Leszczinskis’ was brushing his master’s 
clothes. 

Pavel had often seen the Lieutenant at the gate leading to the 
grounds. He was a squat, ruddy-faced man who wore a tiny clipped 
moustache, pince-nez and a cap with a shiny lacquered peak. Pavel 
also knew that he lived in the side room, the window of which opened 
onto the garden and was visible from the shed roof. 

At this moment the Lieutenant was sitting at the table writing. 
Presently he picked up what he had written and went out of the room. 
He handed the paper to the batman and walked off down the garden 
path leading to the gate. At the summer house he paused to talk to 
someone inside. A moment later Nelly Leszczinska came out. The 
Lieutenant took her arm and together they went out of the gate into 
the street. 

Pavel watched the proceedings from his vantage point. Presently 
a drowsiness stole over him and he was about to close his eyes when 
he noticed the batman entering the Lieutenant’s room; he hung up a 
uniform, opened the window into the garden and tidied up the room. 
Then he went out, closing the door behind him. 

The next moment Pavel saw him over by the stable where the 
horses were. 

Through the open window Pavel had a good view of the whole 
room. On the table lay a belt and some shining object. 

Driven by an irresistible curiosity, Pavel quietly climbed 
noiselessly off the roof onto the cherry tree and slipped down into the 
Leszczinski garden. Bent double, he bounded across the garden and 
peered through the window into the room. Before him on the table 
were a belt with a shoulder strap and holster containing a splendid 
twelve-shot Mannlicher. 

Pavel caught his breath. For a few seconds he was prey to an 
inward struggle, but reckless daring gained the upper hand and 
reaching into the room, he seized the holster, pulled out the new blue- 
steel weapon and sprang down to the ground. With a swift glance 
around he cautiously slipped the pistol into his pocket and dashed 


55 


across the garden to the cherry tree. With the agility of a monkey he 
climbed to the roof and paused to look behind him. The batman was 
still chatting pleasantly with the groom. The garden was silent and 
deserted. Pavel slid down the other side and ran home. 

His mother was busy in the kitchen cooking dinner and paid no 
attention to him. 

He seized a rag from behind a trunk and shoved it into his pocket, 
then slipped out unnoticed, ran across the yard, scaled the fence 
and emerged on the road leading to the woods. Holding the heavy 
revolver to prevent it from pounding against his thigh, he ran as fast 
as he could to the abandoned ruins of a brick kiln nearby. 

His feet seemed barely to touch the ground and the wind whistled 
in his ears. 

Everything was quiet at the old brick kiln. It was a depressing 
sight, with the wooden roof fallen in here and there, the mountains of 
brick rubble and the collapsed ovens. The place was overgrown with 
weeds; no one ever visited it except Pavel and his two friends who 
sometimes came here to play. Pavel knew a great many hiding places 
where the stolen treasure could be concealed. 

He climbed through a gap in one of the ovens and looked around 
him cautiously, but there was no one, in sight. Only the pines soughed 
softly and a slight wind stirred the dust on the road. There was a 
strong smell of resin in the air. 

Pavel placed the revolver wrapped in the rag in a comer of the 
oven floor and covered it with a small pyramid of old bricks. On the 
way out he filled in the entrance into the old kiln with loose bricks, 
noted the exact location, and slowly set out for home, feeling his 
knees trembling under him. 

“How is it all going to end?” he thought and his heart was heavy 
with foreboding. 

To avoid going home he went to the power station earlier than 
usual. He took the key from the watchman and opened the wide doors 
leading into the powerhouse. And while he cleaned out the ash-pit, 


56 


pumped water into the boiler and started the fire going, he wondered 
what was happening at the Leszczinskis’. 

It was about eleven o’clock when Zhukhrai came and called 
Pavel outside. 

“Why was there a search at your place today?” he asked in a 
low voice. 

Pavel started. 

“A search?” 

“I don’t like the look of it,” Zhukhrai continued after a brief pause. 
“Sure you haven’t any idea what they were looking for?” 

Pavel knew very well what they had been looking for, but he could 
not risk telling Zhukhrai about the theft of the revolver. Trembling all 
over with anxiety, he asked: 

“Have they arrested Artem?” 

“Nobody was arrested, but they turned everything upside down in 
the house.” 

This reassured Pavel slightly, although his anxiety did not pass. 
For a few minutes both he and Zhukhrai stood there each wrapped 
in his own thoughts. One of the two knew why the search had been 
made and was worried about the consequences, the other did not and 
hence was on the alert. 

“Damn them, maybe they’ve got wind of me somehow,” Zhukhrai 
thought. “Artem knows nothing about me, but why did they search 
his place? Got to be more careful.” 

The two parted without a word and returned to their work. 

The Leszczinski house was in a turmoil. 

The Lieutenant, noticing that the revolver was missing, called in 
his batman, who declared that the weapon must have been stolen; 
whereupon the officer’s usual restraint deserted him and he struck 
the batman on the ear with all his might. The batman, swaying 
from the impact of the blow, stood stiffly at attention, blinking and 
submissively awaiting further developments. 

The lawyer, called in for an explanation, was indignant at the theft 


57 


and apologised to the Lieutenant for having allowed such a thing to 
occur in his house. 

Victor Leszczinski suggested to his father that the revolver might 
have been stolen by the neighbours, and in particular by that young 
ruffian Pavel Korchagin. The father lost no time in passing on his 
son’s conjecture to the Lieutenant, who at once ordered a search 
made. 

The search was fruitless, and the episode of the missing revolver 
reassured Pavel that even enterprises as risky as this can sometimes 
succeed. 


CHAPTER THREE 


T onya stood at the open window and pensively surveyed the 
familiar garden bordered by the stalwart poplars now stirring 
faintly in the gentle breeze. She could hardly believe that a whole 
year had passed since she had been here where her childhood years 
had been spent. It seemed that she had left home only yesterday and 
returned by this morning’s train. 

Nothing had changed: the rows of raspberry bushes were as 
neatly trimmed as ever, and the garden paths were laid out with the 
same geometric precision and lined with pansies, mother’s favourite 
flowers. Everything in the garden was neat and tidy. Everywhere was 
the imprint of the pedantic hand of the dendrologist. The sight of 
these clean-swept, neatly drawn paths bored Tonya. 

She picked up the novel she had been reading, opened the door 
leading to the veranda and walked down the stairs into the garden; 
she pushed open the little painted wicket gate and slowly headed for 
the pond next to the station pump house. 

She passed the bridge and came out on the tree-lined road. On her 
right was the pond fringed with willows and alders; on the left the 
forest began. 


58 


She was on her way to the ponds at the old stone quarry when the 
sight of a fishing rod bobbing over the water made her pause. 

Leaning over the tru nk of a twisted willow, she parted the branches 
and saw before her a suntanned, barefoot boy with trouser legs rolled 
up above the knee. Next to him was a rusty tin can with worms. The 
lad was too engrossed in his occupation to notice her 

“Do you think you can catch fish here?” 

Pavel glanced angrily over his shoulder. 

Holding on to the willow and bending low over the water was 
a girl Pavel had never seen before. She was wearing a white sailor 
blouse with a striped blue collar and a short light-grey skirt. Short 
socks with a coloured edging clung to her shapely suntanned legs. 

Her chestnut hair was gathered in a heavy braid. 

A slight tremor shook the hand holding the fishing rod and the 
goose-feather float bobbed, sending circles spreading over the 
smoothness of the water. 

“Look, look, a bite!” the excited voice piped behind Pavel. 

He now lost his composure completely and jerked at the line so 
hard that the hook with the squirming worm on the end of it fairly 
leapt out of the water. 


“Not much chance to fish now, damn it! What the devil brought 
her here,” Pavel thought irritably and in order to cover up his 
clumsiness cast the hook farther out, landing, however, exactly 
where he should not have - between two burdocks where the line 
could easily get caught. 

He realised what had happened and without turning around hissed 
at the girl sitting above him on the bank: 

“Can’t you keep quiet? You’ll scare off all the fish that way.” 

From above came the mocking voice: 

“Your black looks have scared the fish away long ago. No self- 
respecting angler goes fishing in the afternoon anyway! ” 

Pavel had done his best to behave politely but this was too much 


59 



60 



for him. He got up. and pushed his cap over his eyes as he usually did 
when roused. 

“You’d do better, miss, if you took yourself off,” he muttered 
through his teeth, drawing on the most inoffensive part of his 
vocabulary. 

Tonya’s eyes narrowed slightly and laughter danced in them. 

“Am I really interfering?” 

The teasing note had gone from her voice and given way to a 
friendly, conciliatory tone, and Pavel, who had primed himself to be 
really rude to this “missy” who had sprung from nowhere, found 
himself disanned. 

“You can stay and watch, if you want to. It’s all the same to me,” 
he said grudgingly and sat down to attend to the float again. It had got 
stuck in the burdock and there was no doubt that the hook had caught 
in the roots. Pavel was afraid to pull at it. If it caught he would not be 
able to get it loose. And the girl would be sure to laugh. He wished 
she would go away. 

Tonya, however, had settled more comfortably on the slightly 
swaying willow trunk and with her book on her knees was watching 
the suntanned dark-eyed rough-mannered young man who had 
given her such an ungracious reception and was now deliberately 
ignoring her. 

Pavel saw the girl clearly reflected in the mirror-like surface of the 
pond, and when she seemed to be absorbed in her book he cautiously 
pulled at the entangled line. The float ducked under the water and the 
line grew taut. 

“Caught, damn it!” flashed in his mind and at the same moment he 
saw out of the comer of his eye the laughing face of the girl looking 
up at him from the water. 

Just then two young men, both seventh-grade Gymnasium 
students, were coming across the bridge at the pump house. One of 
them was the seventeen-year-old son of engineer Sukharko, the chief 
of the railway yards, a loutish, fair-haired, freckle-faced scapegrace 
whom his schoolmates had dubbed Poc km arked Shurka. He was 


61 


carrying a fancy fishing rod and line and had a cigarette stuck in 
the comer of his mouth. With him was Victor Leszczinski, a tall, 
effeminate youth. 

“Now this girl is a peach, there’s nobody like her about here,” 
Sukharko was saying, winking significantly as he bent toward his 
companion. “You can take my word for it that she’s chock-full of 
romance. She’s in the sixth grade and goes to school in Kiev. Now 
she’s come to spend the summer with her father - he’s the chief forest 
warden here. My sister Liza knows her. I wrote her a letter once in a 
sentimental sort of vein. ‘I love you madly’ - you know the sort of 
thing - ‘and await your answer in trepidation’. Even dug up some 
suitable verses from Nadson.” 

“Well, what came of it?” Victor asked curiously. 

“Oh, she was frightfully stuck up about it,” Sukharko muttered 
rather sheepishly. “Told me not to waste paper writing letters and all 
that. But that’s how it always is in the beginning. I’m an old hand 
at this sort of thing. As a matter of fact I can’t be bothered with 
all that romantic nonsense - mooning about for ages, sighing. It’s 
much simpler to take a stroll of an evening down to the repairmen’s 
barracks where for three roubles you can pick up a beauty that’d 
make your mouth water. And no nonsense either. I used to go out 
there with Valka Tikhonov - do you know him? The foreman on the 
railway.” 

Victor scowled in disgust. 

“Do you mean to tell me you go in for foul stuff like that, 
Shura?” 

Shura chewed at his cigarette, spat and replied with a sneer: 

“Don’t pretend to be so virtuous. We know what you go in for.” 

Victor interrupted him. 

“Will you introduce me to this peach of yours?” 

“Of course. Let’s hurry or she’ll give us the slip. Yesterday 
morning she went fishing by herself.” 

As the two friends came up to Tonya, Sukharko took the cigarette 
out of his mouth and greeted her with a gallant bow. 


62 


“How do you do. Mademoiselle Tumanova. Have you come to 
fish too?” 

“No. I’m just watching,” replied Tonya. 

“You two haven’t met, have you?” Sukharko hastened to put in, 
taking Victor by the ann. “This is my friend Victor Leszczinski.” 

Victor extended his hand to Tonya in some confusion. 

“And why aren’t you fishing today?” Sukharko inquired in an 
effort to keep up the conversation. 

“I forgot to bring my line,” Tonya replied. 

“I’ll get another one right away,” Sukharko said. “In the meantime 
you can have mine. I’ll be back in a minute.” 

He had kept his promise to Victor to introduce him to the girl and 
was now anxious to leave them alone. 

“I’d rather not, we should only be in the way. There’s somebody 
fishing here already,” said Tonya. 

“In whose way?” Sukharko asked. “Oh, you mean him?” For the 
first time he noticed Pavel who was sitting under a bush. “Well, I’ll 
get rid of him in two shakes.” 

Before Tonya could stop him he had slipped down to where Pavel 
was busy with his rod and line. 

“Pull in that line of yours and clear out,” Sukharko told Pavel. 
“Hurry up now...” he added as Pavel continued fishing calmly. 

Pavel looked up and gave Sukharko a glance that boded no good. 

“Shut up, you! Hold your noise!” 

“Wha-a-t!” Sukharko exploded. “You’ve got the cheek to answer 
back, you wretched tramp! Clear out of here!” He kicked violently at 
the tin of worms which spun around in the air and fell into the pond, 
splashing water in Tonya’s face. 

“You ought to be ashamed of yourself, Sukharko!” she cried. 

Pavel leapt to his feet. He knew that Sukharko was the son of the 
chief of the railway yards where Artem worked, and that if he hit that 
flabby, mousy mug of his he would complain to his father and Artem 
would get into trouble. This alone prevented him from settling the 
matter then and there. 


63 


Sensing that Pavel would hit out at him in another moment, 
Sukharko rushed forward and pushed him in the chest with both 
hands. Pavel, standing at the water’s edge, teetered dangerously, 
but by frantically waving his arms regained his balance and saved 
himself from falling in. 

Sukharko was two years older than Pavel and notorious as a 
troublemaker and bully. 

The blow in the chest made Pavel see red. 

“So that’s what you want! Take this!” And with a short swing of 
his arm he drove a cutting blow into Sukharko’s face. Before the 
latter had time to recover, Pavel seized him firmly by his uniform 
blouse, clinched him and dragged him into the water. 

Knee-deep in the pond, his polished shoes and trousers soaking 
wet, Sukharko struggled with all his might to wrench himself loose 
from Pavel’s powerful grip. Having achieved his purpose, Pavel 
jumped ashore. The enraged Sukharko charged after him, ready to 
tear him to pieces. 

As he spun around to face his opponent, Pavel remembered: 

“Rest your weight on your left foot, with your right leg tense and 
right knee bent. Put the weight of your whole body behind the blow, 
striking upward, at the point of the chin.” 

Crack! 

There was a harsh click of teeth. Then, squealing from the 
excruciating pain that shot through his chin and his tongue which 
was caught between the teeth, Sukharko flailed wildly with his arms 
and fell back into the water with a loud splash. 

Up on the bank Tonya was doubled up with laughter. 

“Bravo, bravo!” she cried, clapping her hands. “Well done!” 

Seizing his entangled fishing line, Pavel jerked at it so hard that it 
snapped, and scrambled up the bank to the road. 

“That’s Pavel Korchagin, a hooligan if there ever was one,” he 
heard Victor say to Tonya as he went. 

There was trouble brewing at the station. Rumour had it that the 


64 


railwaymen on the line were downing tools. The workers of the yards 
at the next large station had started something ‘big. The Germans 
arrested two engine drivers suspected of carrying proclamations with 
them. And among the workers who had ties with the countryside 
there was serious fennent because of the requisitioning and the return 
of landlords to their estates. 

The lashes of the Hetman’s guards seared the backs of the 
peasants. The partisan movement was developing in the gubernia; 
the Bolsheviks had already organised nearly a dozen partisan 
detachments. 

There was no rest for Zhukhrai these days. During his stay in the 
town he had accomplished a great deal. 

He had made the acquaintance of many railway workers, attended 
gatherings of young folk, and built up a strong group among the 
mechanics at the railway yards and the sawmill workers. He tried to 
find out where Artem stood, and he asked him once what he thought 
about the Bolshevik Party and its cause. 

“I don’t know much about these parties, Fyodor,” the burly 
mechanic replied. “But if there’s help needed, you can count on 
me.” 

Fyodor was satisfied, for he knew that Artem was made of the 
right stuff and would stand by his word. As for the Party, he wasn’t 
ready for that yet. “Never mind,” he thought, “in times like these 
he’ll soon learn for himself.” 

Fyodor left the power station for a job at the railway yards, where 
it was easier for him to carry on his work. At the electric station he 
had been cut off from the railway. 

Traffic on the railway was exceedingly heavy. The Germans 
were shipping carloads of loot by the thousand from the Ukraine to 
Germany: rye, wheat, cattle... 

One day the Hetman’s guards arrested Ponomarenko, the station 
telegrapher. The blow fell quite unexpectedly. He was taken to the 


65 


guardhouse and brutally beaten. It was he, evidently, who gave away 
Roman Sidorenko, a workmate of Artem’s. 

Two Germans and a Hetman’s guard, the Station Commandant’s 
Assistant, came for Roman during working hours. Without saying 
a word the Assistant Commandant walked over to the bench where 
Roman was working and cut him across the face with his riding 
whip. 

“You come along, you sonofabitch!” he said. “We’ve got 
something to talk to you about.” With an ugly leer he seized hold of 
the mechanic’s arm and wrenched it violently. “We’ll teach you to go 
around agitating!” 

Artem, who had been working at the vice next to Roman, dropped 
his file and came at the Assistant Commandant, his massive frame 
menacingly poised. 

“Keep your fists off him, you bastard!” Artem spoke hoarsely, 
doing his best to restrain his rising fury. 

The Assistant Commandant fell back, unfastening his holster as he 
did so. One of the Germans, a squat, stocky man, unslung his heavy 
rifle with the broad-bladed bayonet from his shoulder and sharply 
clicked the bolt. 

“Halt!” he barked, ready to shoot at another move. 

The tall, brawny mechanic stood helpless before the puny soldier; 
he could do nothing. 

Both Roman and Artem were placed under arrest. Artem was 
released an hour later, but Roman was locked up in a luggage room 
in the basement. 

Ten minutes after the arrest not a single man was working. The 
depot workers assembled in the station park where they were joined 
by the switchmen and the men employed at the supply warehouses. 
Feeling ran high and someone drafted a written demand for the 
release of Roman and Ponomarenko. 

Indignation rose higher still when the Assistant Commandant 
rushed into the park at the head of a group of guards brandishing a 
revolver and shouting: 


66 


“Back to work, or we’ll arrest every last man of you on the spot! 
And put some of you up against the wall!” 

The infuriated workers replied with a bellow that sent him running 
for cover to the station. In the meantime, however, the Station 
Commandant had summoned German troops from the town and 
truckloads of them were already careering down the road leading to 
the station. 

The workers dispersed and hurried home. No one, not even the 
stationmaster, remained on the job. Zhukhrai’s work was beginning 
to make itself felt; this was the first time the workers at the station 
had taken mass action. 

The Germans mounted a heavy machine gun on the platform; it 
stood there like a pointer that has spotted a quarry. Next to it squatted 
a German corporal, his hand resting on the trigger grip. 

The station grew deserted. 

At night the arrests began. Artem was among those taken. Zhukhrai 
escaped by not going home that night. 

All the arrested men were herded together in a huge freight shed 
and given the alternative of either returning to work or being court- 
martialled. 

Practically all the railwaymen were on strike all along the line. For 
a day and a night not a single train went through, and one hundred 
and twenty kilometres away a battle was being fought with a large 
partisan detachment which had cut the railway line and blown up the 
bridges. 

During the night a German troop train pulled in but was held up 
because the engine driver, his helper and the fireman had deserted 
the locomotive. There were two more trains on the station sidings 
waiting to leave. 

The heavy doors of the freight shed swung open and in walked the 
Station Commandant, a German lieutenant, his assistant, and a group 
of other Germans. 

“Korchagin, Polentovsky, Bruzzhak,” the Commandant’s 
Assistant called out. “You will make up an engine crew and take a 


67 


train out at once. If you refuse, you will be shot on the spot. What 
do you say?” 

The three workers nodded sullen consent. They were escorted 
under guard to the locomotive while the Commandant’s Assistant 
went on to call out the names of the driver, helper and fireman for 
the next train. 

The locomotive snorted angrily, sending up geysers of sparks. 
Breathing heavily it breasted the gloom ahead as it pounded along the 
track into the depths of night. Artem, who had just shovelled coal into 
the firebox, kicked the door shut, took a gulp of water from the snub¬ 
nosed teapot standing on the toolbox, and turned to Polentovsky, the 
old engine driver. 

“Well, pa, are we taking it through?” 

Polentovsky’s eyes blinked irritably under their overhanging 
eyebrows. 

“You will when there’s a bayonet at your back.” 

“We could chuck everything and make a dash for it,” suggested 
Bruzzhak, watching the Gennan soldier sitting on the tender from the 
comer of his eye. 

“I thi nk so too,” muttered Artem, “if it wasn’t for that bird behind 
our backs.” 

“That’s right,” Bruzzhak was non-committal as he stuck his head 
out of the window. 

Polentovsky moved closer to Artem. 

“We can’t take the train through, understand?” he whispered. 
“There’s fighting going on ahead. Our fellows have blown up the 
track. And here we are bringing these swine there so they can shoot 
them down. You know, son, even in the tsar’s time I never drove an 
engine when there was a strike on, and I’m not going to do it now. 
We’d disgrace ourselves for life if we brought destruction down on 
our own kind. The other engine-crew ran away, didn’t they? They 
risked their lives, but they did it. We just can’t take the train through. 
What do you thi nk ?” 


68 


“You’re right, pa, but what are you going to do about him?” and he 
indicated the soldier with a glance. 

The engine driver scowled. He wiped his sweating forehead with a 
handful of waste and stared with bloodshot eyes at the pressure gauge 
as if seeking an answer there to the question tormenting him. Then he 
swore in fury and desperation. 

Artem drank again from the teapot. The two men were thinking of 
one thing, but neither could bring himself to break the tense silence. 
Artem recalled Zhukhrai: “Well, brother, what do you think about the 
Bolshevik Party and the Communist idea?” and his own reply: “I am 
always ready to help, you can count on me...” 

“A fine way to help,” he thought, “driving a punitive 
expedition...” 

Polentovsky was now bending over the toolbox next to Artem. 
Hoarsely he said: 

“That fellow, we’ve got to do him in. Understand?” 

Artem started. Polentovsky added through clenched teeth: 

“There’s no other way out. Got to knock him over the head and 
chuck the throttle and the levers into the firebox, cut off the steam and 
then run for it.” 

Feeling as if a heavy weight had dropped off his shoulders Artem 
said: “Right!” 

Leaning toward Bruzzhak, Artem told him of their decision. 

Bruzzhak did not answer at once. They all were taking a very great 
risk. Each had a family at home to thi nk of. Polentovsky’s was the 
largest: he had nine mouths to feed. But all three knew that they could 
not take the train to its destination. 

“Good, I’m with you,” Bruzzhak said. “But what about him? 
Who’s going to...” He did not finish the sentence but his meaning 
was clear enough to Artem. 

Artem turned to Polentovsky, who was now busy with the throttle, 
and nodded as if to say that Bruzzhak agreed with them, but then, 
tormented by a question still unsettled, he stepped closer to the old 
man. 


69 


“But how?” 

Polentovsky looked at Artem. 

“You begin, you’re the strongest. We’ll conk him with the crowbar 
and it’ll be all over.” The old man was violently agitated. 

Artem frowned. 

“I can’t do it. I can’t. After all, when you come to think of it, the 
man isn’t to blame. He’s also been forced into this at the point of the 
bayonet.” 

Polentovsky’s eyes flashed. 

“Not to blame, you say? Neither are we for being made to do this 
job. But don’t forget it’s a punitive expedition we’re hauling. These 
innocents are going out to shoot down partisans. Are the partisans to 
blame then? No, my lad, you’ve mighty little sense for all that you’re 
strong as an ox...” 

“All right, all right,” Artem’s voice cracked. He picked up the 
crowbar, but Polentovsky whispered to him: 

“I’ll do it, be more certain that way. You take the shovel and climb 
up to pass down the coal from the tender. If necessary you give him 
one with the shovel. I’ll pretend to be loosening up the coal.” 

Bruzzhak heard what was said, and nodded. “The old man’s right,” 
he said, and took his place at the throttle. 

The German soldier in his forage cap with a red band around it 
was sitting at the edge of the tender holding his rifle between his 
feet and smoking a cigar. From time to time he threw a glance at the 
engine crew going about their work in the cab. 

When Artem climbed up on top of the tender the sentry paid little 
attention to him. And when Polentovsky, who pretended he wanted to 
get at the larger chunks of coal next to the side of the tender, signed 
to him to move out of way, the German readily slipped down in the 
direction of the door leading to the cab. 

The sudden crunch of the German’s skull as it caved in under the 
crowbar made Artem and Bruzzhak jump, as if touched by red-hot 
iron. The body of the soldier rolled limply into the passage leading 
to the cab. 


70 


The blood seeped rapidly through the grey wool forage cap and 
the rifle clattered against the iron side of the tender. 

“Finished,” Polentovsky whispered as he dropped the crowbar. “No 
turning back for us now,” he added, his face twitching convulsively. 

His voice broke, then rose to a shout to repel the silence that 
descended heavily on the three men. 

“Unscrew the throttle, quick!” he shouted. 

In ten minutes the job was done. The locomotive, now out of 
control, was slowly losing speed. 

The dark ponderous shapes of trees on the wayside lunged into 
the radius of light around the locomotive only to recede into the 
impenetrable gloom behind. In vain the engine’s headlights sought to 
pierce the thick shroud of night for more than a dozen metres ahead, 
and gradually its stertorous breathing slowed down as if it had spent 
the last of its strength. 

“Jump, son!” Artem heard Polentovsky’s voice behind him and he 
let go of the handrail. The momentum of the train sent his powerful 
body hurtling forward until with a jolt his feet met the earth surging 
up from below. He ran for a pace or two and tumbled heavily head 
over heels. 

Two other shadows left the locomotive simultaneously, one from 
each side of the cab. 

Gloom had settled over the Bruzzhak house. Antonina 
Vasilievna, Sergei’s mother, had eaten her heart out during the past 
four days. There had been no news from her husband; all she knew 
was that the Germans had forced him to man an engine together 
with Korchagin and Polentovsky. And yesterday three of the 
Hetman’s guards had come around and questioned her in a rough, 
abusive manner. 

From what they said she vaguely gathered that something had 
gone wrong and, gravely perturbed, she threw her kerchief over her 
head as soon as the men left and set out to see Maria Yakovlevna in 
hope of learning some news of her husband. 


71 


Valya, her eldest daughter, who was tidying up the kitchen, noticed 
her slipping out of the house. 

“Where you off to. Mother?” the girl asked. 

“To the Korchagins,” Antonina Vasilievna replied, glancing at 
her daughter with eyes brimming with tears. “Perhaps they know 
something about father. If Sergei conies home tell him to go over to 
the station to see the Polentovskys.” 

Valya threw her arms around her mother’s shoulders. 

“Don’t worry, dear,” she said as she saw her to the door. 

As usual, Maria Yakovlevna gave Antonina Vasilievna a hearty 
welcome. Each of the two women hoped that the other would have 
some news to tell, but the hope vanished as soon as they got talking. 

The Korchagins’ place had also been searched during the night. 
The soldiers had been looking for Artem and had told Maria 
Yakovlevna on leaving to report to the Kommandantur as soon as her 
son returned. 

The coming of the patrol had frightened Korchagina almost out 
of her wits. She had been home alone, for Pavel as usual was on the 
night shift at the power plant. 

When Pavel returned from work early in the morning and heard 
from his mother about the search, he felt a gnawing anxiety for 
his brother’s safety. Despite differences in character and Artem’s 
seeming coldness, the two brothers were deeply attached to one 
another. It was a stern, undemonstrative affection, but Pavel kn ew 
that there was no sacrifice he would hesitate to make for his brother’s 
sake. 

Without stopping to rest, Pavel ran over to the station to look 
for Zhukhrai. He could not find him, and the other workers he 
knew could tell him nothing about the missing men. Engine driver 
Polentovsky’s family too was completely in the dark; all he could 
leam from Polentovsky’s youngest son, Boris, whom he met in the 
yard, was that their house too had been searched that night. The 
soldiers had been looking for Polentovsky. 


72 


Pavel came back to his mother with no news to report. Exhausted, 
he threw himself on the bed and dropped instantly into fitful 
slumber. 

Valya looked up as the knock came at the door. 

“Who’s there?’” she asked, unhooking the catch. 

The dishevelled carroty head of Klimka Marche nk o appeared 
in the open door. He had evidently been running, for he was out of 
breath and his face was red from exertion. 

“Is your mother home?” he asked Valya. 

“No, she’s gone out.” 

“Where to?” 

“To the Korchagins, I think,” Valya seized hold of Klimka’s sleeve 
as the boy was about to dash off. 

Klimka looked up at the girl in hesitation. 

“I’ve got to see her about something,” he ventured. 

“What is it?” Valya would not let him go. “Out with it, you red¬ 
headed bear you, and stop keeping me in suspense,” the girl said in 
an imperative tone. 

Klimka forgot Zhukhrai’s warnings and his strict instructions to 
deliver the note into Antonina Vasilievna’s hands, and he pulled a 
soiled scrap of paper out of his pocket and handed it to the girl. He 
could not refuse anything to Sergei’s pretty fair-haired sister, for truth 
to tell he had a soft spot in his heart for her. 

He was far too timid, however, to admit even to himself that he 
liked Valya. The girl quickly read the slip of paper he had handed to 
her. 


Dear Tonya! 

Don’t worry. All’s well. 

They ’re safe and sound. Soon you will have more news. Let the 
others know that everything is all right so they needn i worry. 
Destroy this note. 

Zakhar. 


73 


Valya rushed over to Klimka. 

“My dear little brown bear, where did you get it? Who gave it 
to you?” And she shook Klimka so violently that he quite lost his 
presence of mind and made his second blunder before he knew it. 

“Zhukhrai gave it to me down at the station.” Then, remembering 
that he should not have said it, be added: “But he told me not to give 
it to anybody but your mother.” 

“That’s all right,” Valya laughed. “I wont tell anybody. Now 
you run along like a good little bear to Pavel’s place and you’ll find 
mother there.” And she gave the lad a light push in the back. 

A second later Klimka’s red head had disappeared through the 
garden gate. 

None of the three railwaymen returned home. In the evening 
Zhukhrai came to the Korchagins and told Maria Yakovlevna what 
had happened on the train. He did his best to calm the fear-stricken 
mother, and assured her that all three were safe with Bruzzhak’s 
uncle who lived in an out-of-the-way village; they could not come 
back now, of course, but the Germans were in a tight fix and the 
situation was likely to change any day. 

The disappearance of the three men brought their families closer 
together than ever. The rare notes that were received from them were 
read with rejoicing, but home seemed an empty and dreary place 
without them. 

One day Zhukhrai dropped in to see Polentovsky’s wife as if in 
passing, and gave her some money. 

“Here’s something from your husband to keep you going,” he 
said. “Only see you don’t mention it to anyone.” 

The old woman gratefully clasped his hand. 

“Thanks. We need it badly. There’s nothing to give the children 
to eat.” 

The money actually came from the fund left by Bulgakov. 

“Well, now we’ll see what comes next,” said Zhukhrai to himself 
as he walked back to the station. “Even if the strike’s broken under 
the threat of shooting, even if the workers are back at the job, the fire 


74 


has been kindled and it can’t be put out any more. As for those three, 
they’re stout fellows, true proletarians.” A wave of elation swept 
him. 

In a little old smithy whose soot-blackened front faced the road 
in the outskirts of the village of Vorobyova Balka, Polentovsky 
stood before the glowing forge, his eyes narrowed from the glare, 
and turned over a red-hot piece of iron with a pair of long-handled 
tongs. 

Artem pumped the bellows suspended from a crossbeam 
overhead. 

“A skilled worker won’t go under in the villages these days 

- there’s as much work to be had as you might want,” chuckling 
good-naturedly in his beard the engine driver said. “A week or two 
like this and we’ll be able to send some fat back and flour home to the 
folks. The peasant always respects a smith, son. You’ll see, we’ll feed 
ourselves up like capitalists, ha ha! Zakhar’s a bit different, from us 

- he hangs on to the peasantry, has his roots in the land through that 
uncle of his. Well, I can’t say as I blame him. You and me, Artem, 
we’ve got neither harrow nor barrow, so to say, nought but a strong 
back and a pair of hands - what they call eternal proletarians, that’s 
us - ha ha - but old Zakhar’s kind of split in two, one foot in the 
locomotive and the other in the village.” He shifted the red-hot metal 
with the tongs and continued in a more serious vein: “As for us, son, 
things look bad. If the Germans aren’t smashed pretty soon we’ll 
have to get through to Yekaterinoslav or Rostov; otherwise we might 
find ourselves nabbed and strung up between heaven and earth before 
we know it.” 

“You’re right there,” Artem mumbled. 

“I wish I knew how our people are getting on out there. Are the 
Haydamaks leaving them alone, I wonder.” 

“Yes, pa, we’re in a mess. We’ll just have to give up thinking of 
going home.” 


75 


The engine driver pulled the hot piece of glowing blue metal from 
the forge and with a dexterous movement laid it on the anvil. 

“Lay on to it, son!” 

Artem seized a heavy hammer, swung it high above his head and 
then brought it down on the anvil. A fountain of bright sparks spurted 
with a hiss in all directions, lighting up for a moment the darkest 
comers of the smithy. 

Polentovsky turned over the red-hot slab under the powerful blows 
and the iron obediently flattened out like so much soft wax. 

Through the open doors of the smithy came the warm breath of 
the dark night. 

Down below lay the lake, dark and vast. The pines surrounding it 
on all sides nodded their lofty heads. 

“Like living things,” thought Tonya looking up at them. She was 
lying in a grass-carpeted depression on the granite shore. High above 
her beyond the hollow was the forest’s edge, and below, at the very 
foot of the bluff, the lake. The shadows of the cliffs pressing in on the 
lake gave the dark sheet of water a still darker fringe. 

This old stone quarry not far from the station was Tonya’s favourite 
haunt. Springs had burst forth in the deep abandoned workings and 
now three lakes had formed there. The sound of splashing from 
where the shore dropped into the water caused Tonya to raise her 
head. Parting the branches in front of her, she looked in the direction 
of the sound. A supple, sun-tanned body was swimming away from 
the shore with strong strokes. Tonya caught sight of the swimmer’s 
brown back and dark head; he was blowing like a walrus, paddling 
briskly in the water, rolling over, somersaulting and diving, then he 
turned over on his back and floated, squinting in the bright sun, his 
arms stretched out and his body slightly bent. 

Tonya let the branch fall back into place. “It’s not nice to look,” 
she smiled to herself and returned to her reading. 

She was so engrossed in the book which Leszczinski had given 
her that she did not notice someone climb over the granite rocks 


76 


that separated the hollow from the pine woods; only when a pebble, 
inadvertently set into motion by the intruder, rolled onto the book did 
she look up with a start to see Pavel Korchagin standing before her. 
He too was taken aback by the encounter and in his confusion turned 
to go. 

“It must have been him I saw in the water,” Tonya thought as she 
noticed his wet hair. 

“Did I frighten you? I didn’t know you were here.” Pavel laid his 
hand on the rocky ledge. He had recognised Tonya. 

“You aren’t interfering at all. If you care to, you can stay and talk 
with me for a while.” 

Pavel looked at Tonya in surprise. 

“What could we talk about?” 

Tonya smiled. 

“Why don’t you sit down - here, for instance?” She pointed to a 
stone. “What is your name?” 

“Pavka Korchagin.” 

“My name’s Tonya. So now we’ve introduced ourselves.” 

Pavel twisted his cap in embarrassment. 

“So you’re called Pavka?” Tonya broke the silence. “Why Pavka? 
It doesn’t sound nice, Pavel would be ever so much better. That’s 
what I shall call you - Pavel. Do you come here often...” She wanted 
to say “to swim,” but not wishing to admit having seen him in the 
water, she said instead: “for a walk?” 

“No, not often. Only when I’ve got time off,” Pavel replied. 

“So you work somewhere?” Tonya questioned him further. 

“At the power plant. As a stoker.” 

“Tell me, where did you leam to fight so skilfully?” Tonya asked 
unexpectedly. 

“What’s my fighting to you?” Pavel blurted out in spite of 
himself. 

“Now don’t be angry, Korchagin,” said Tonya hastily, seeing that 
her question had annoyed him. “I’m just interested, that’s all. What 


77 


a punch that was! You shouldn’t be so merciless.” She burst out 
laughing. 

“Sorry for him, eh?” Pavel asked. 

“Not at all. On the contrary, Sukharko only got what he deserved. 
I enjoyed it immensely. I hear you get into scraps quite often.” 

“Who says so?” Pavel pricked up his ears. 

“Well, Victor Leszczinski claims you are a professional 
scrapper.” 

Pavel’s features darkened. 

“Victor’s a swine and a softy. He ought to be thankful he didn’t 
get it then. I heard what he said about me, but I didn’t want to muck 
up my hands.” 

“Don’t use such language, Pavel. It’s not nice,” Tonya interrupted 
him. 

Pavel bristled. 

“Why did I have to start talking to this ninny?” he thought to 
himself. “Ordering me about like this: first it’s ‘Pavka’ doesn’t suit 
her and now she’s finding fault with my language.” 

“What have you against Leszczinski?” Tonya asked. 

“He’s a sissy, a mama’s boy without any guts! My fingers itch at 
the sight of his kind: always trying to walk all over you, thinks he 
can do anything he wants because he’s rich. But I don’t give a damn 
for his wealth. Just let him try to touch me and he’ll get it good and 
proper. Fellows like that are only asking for a punch in the jaw,” 
Pavel went on, roused. 

Tonya regretted having mentioned Leszczinski. She could see that 
this young man had old scores to settle with the dandified schoolboy. 
To steer the conversation into more placid channels she began 
questioning Pavel about his family and work. 

Before he knew it, Pavel was answering the girl’s questions in 
great detail, forgetting that he had wanted to go. 

“Why didn’t you continue studying?” Tonya asked. 

“Got thrown out of school.” 

“Why?” 


78 


Pavel blushed. 

“I put some shag in the priest’s dough, and so they chucked me 
out. He was mean, that priest was; he’d worry the life out of you.” 
And Pavel told her the whole story. 

Tonya listened with interest. Pavel got over his initial shyness and 
was soon talking to her as if she were an old acquaintance. Among 
other things he told her about his brother’s disappearance. Neither 
of the two noticed the hours pass as they sat there in the hollow 
engrossed in friendly conversation. At last Pavel sprang to his feet. 

“It’s time I was at work. I ought to be firing the boilers instead of 
sitting here gassing. Danilo is sure to raise a fuss now.” Ill at ease 
once more he added: “Well, goodbye, miss. I’ve got to dash off to 
town now.” 

Tonya jumped up, pulling on her jacket. 

“I must go too. Let’s go together.” 

“Oh no, couldn’t do that. I’ll have to run.” 

“All right. I’ll race you. Let’s see who gets there first.” 

Pavel gave her a disdainful look. 

“Race me? You haven’t the ghost of a chance!” 

“We’ll see. Let’s get out of here first.” 

Pavel jumped over the ledge of stone, then ex-tended a hand to 
Tonya, and the two trotted through the woods to the broad, level 
clearing leading to the station. 

Tonya stopped in the middle of the road. 

“Now let’s go: one, two, three, go! Try and catch me!” She was off 
like a whirlwind down the track, the soles of her shoes flashing and 
the tail of her bluejacket flying in the wind. 

Pavel raced after her. 

“I’ll be up with her in two shakes,” thought Pavel as he sped after 
the flying jacket, but it was only at the end of the lane quite close to 
the station that he overtook her. Making a final spurt, he caught up 
with her and seized her shoulders with his strong hands. 

“Tag! You’re it!” he cried gaily, panting from the exertion. 

“Don’t! You’re hurting me!” Tonya resisted. 


79 


As they stood there panting, their pulses racing, Tonya, exhausted 
by the wild chase, leaned ever so lightly against Pavel in a fleeting 
moment of sweet intimacy that he was not soon to forget. 

“Nobody has ever overtaken me before,” she said as she drew 
away from him. 

At this they parted and with a farewell wave of his cap Pavel ran 
toward town. 

When Pavel pushed open the boiler-room door, Danilo, the other 
stoker, was already busy firing the boiler. 

“Couldn’t you make it any later?” he growled. “Expect me to do 
your work for you, or what?” 

Pavel patted his mate on the shoulder placatingly. 

“We’ll have the fire going full blast in a jiffy, old man,” he said 
cheerfully and applied himself to the firewood. 

Toward midnight, when Danilo was snoring lustily on the 
woodpile, Pavel finished oiling the engine, wiped his hands on 
waste, pulled out the sixty-second instalment of Giuseppe Garibaldi 
from a toolbox, and was soon engrossed in the fascinating account of 
the interminable adventures of the Neapolitan “Redshirts” legendary 
leader. 

“She gazed at the duke with her beautiful blue eyes...” 

“She’s also got blue eyes,” thought Pavel. “And she’s different, 
not at all like rich folk. And she can run like the devil.” 

Engrossed in the memory of his encounter with Tonya during 
the day, Pavel was oblivious of the rising whine of the engine 
which was now straining under the pressure of excess steam; the 
huge flywheel whirled madly and a nervous tremor ran through the 
concrete mounting. 

A glance at the pressure gauge showed Pavel that the needle was 
several points above the red warning line. 

“Damn it!” Pavel leapt to the safety valve, gave it two quick turns, 
and the steam ejected through the exhaust pipe into the river hissed 
hoarsely outside the boiler room. Pulling a lever, Pavel threw the 
drive belt onto the pump pulley. 


80 


He glanced at Danilo, but the latter was fast asleep, his mouth 
wide open and his nose emitting fearful sounds. 

Half a minute later the pressure gauge needle had returned to 
normal. 

After parting with Pavel, Tonya headed for home, her thoughts 
occupied by her encounter with the dark-eyed young man; 
although she was unaware of it her-self, she was happy because 
she had met him. 

“What spirit he has, what grit! And he isn’t at all the ruffian I 
imagined him to be. At any rate he’s nothing like all those silly 
schoolboys...” 

Pavel was of another mould, he came from an environment to 
which Tonya was a stranger. 

“But he can be tamed,” she thought. “He’ll be an interesting friend 
to have.” 

As she approached home, she saw Liza Sukharko and Nelly and 
Victor Leszczinski in the garden. Victor was reading. They were 
obviously waiting for her. 

They exchanged greetings and she sat down on a bench. In the 
midst of the empty small talk, Victor sat down beside her and asked: 

“Have you read the novel I gave you?” 

“Novel?” Tonya looked up. “Oh, I...” She almost told him she had 
forgotten the book on the lakeshore. 

“Did you like the love story?” Victor looked at her questioningly. 

Tonya was lost in thought for a moment, then, slowly tracing an 
intricate pattern on the sand of the walk with the toe of her shoe, she 
raised her head and looked at Victor. 

“No. I have begun a far more interesting love story.” 

“Indeed?” Victor drawled, annoyed. “Who’s the author?” 

Tonya looked at him with shining, smiling eyes. 

“There is no author...” 

“Tonya, ask your visitors in. Tea’s served,” Tonya’s mother called 
from the balcony. 

Taking the two girls by the arm, Tonya led the way to the house. 


81 


As he followed them, Victor puzzled over her words, unable to 
fathom their meaning. 

This strange new feeling that had imperceptibly taken possession 
of him vaguely disturbed Pavel; he did not understand it and his 
rebellious spirit was troubled. 

Tonya’s father was the chief forest warden, which, as far as Pavel 
was concerned, put him in the same class as the lawyer Leszczinski. 

Pavel had grown up in poverty and want, and he was hostile to 
anyone whom he considered to be wealthy. And so his feeling for 
Tonya was tinged with apprehension and misgiving; Tonya was not 
one of his own crowd, she was not simple and easy to understand 
like Galina, the stonemason’s daughter, for instance. With Tonya he 
was always on his guard, ready to rebuff any hint of the mockery or 
condescension he would expect a beautiful and cultivated girl like 
her to show towards a common stoker like himself. 

He had not seen her for a whole week and today he decided to go 
down to the lake. He deliberately chose the road that took him past 
her house in the hope of meeting her. As he sauntered along by the 
fence, he caught sight of the familiar sailor blouse at the far end of 
the garden. He picked up a pine cone lying on the road, aimed it at the 
white blouse and let fly. 

Tonya swung round and ran over to him, stretching out her hand 
over the fence with a wann smile. 

“You’ve come at last,” she said and there was gladness in her 
voice. “Where have you been all this time? I went down to the lake 
to get the book I had left there. I thought you might be there. Won’t 
you come in?” 

Pavel shook his head. 

“No.” 

“Why not?” Her eyebrows rose in surprise. 

“Your father wouldn’t like it, I bet. He’d likely give you hell for 
letting a ragamuffin like me into the garden.” 

“What nonsense, Pavel,” Tonya said in anger. “Come inside at 


82 


once. My father would never say anything of the kind. You’ll see for 
yourself. Now come in.” 

She ran to open the gate for him and Pavel followed her 
uncertainly. 

“Do you like books?” she asked him when they were seated at a 
round garden table. 

“Very much,” Pavel replied eagerly. 

“What book do you like best of all?” 

Pavel pondered the question for a few moments before replying: 
“Jeezeppy Garibaldi.” 

“Giuseppe Garibaldi,” Tonya corrected him. “So you like that 
book particularly?” 

“Yes. I’ve read all the sixty-eight instalments. I buy five of them 
every pay day. Garibaldi, that’s a man for you!” Pavel exclaimed. “A 
real hero! That’s what I call the real stuff. All those battles he had to 
fight and he always came out on top. And he travelled all over the 
world! If he was alive today I would join him, I swear I would. He 
used to take young workers into his band and they all fought together 
for the poor folk.” 

“Would you. like me to show you our library?” Tonya said and 
took his arm. 

“Oh no, I’m not going into the house,” Pavel objected. 

“Why are you so stubborn? What is there to be afraid of?” 

Pavel glanced down at his bare feet which were none too clean, 
and scratched the back of his head. 

“Are you sure your mother or your father won’t throw me out?” 

“If you don’t stop saying such things I’ll get really annoyed with 
you,” Tonya flared up. 

“Well, Leszczinski would never let the likes of us into his house, 
he always talks to us in the kitchen. I had to go there for something 
once and Nelly wouldn’t even let me into the room - must have been 
afraid I’d spoil her carpets or something,” Pavel said with a grin. 

“Come on, come on,” she urged him, taking him by the shoulder 
and giving him a friendly little push toward the porch. 


83 


She led him through the dining room into a room with a huge 
oak bookcase. And when she opened the doors Pavel beheld 
hundreds of books standing in neat rows. He had never seen such 
wealth in his life. 

“Now we’ll find an interesting book for you, and you must promise 
to come regularly for more. Will you?” 

Pavel nodded happily. 

“I love books,” he said. 

They spent several pleasant hours together that day. She introduced 
him to her mother. It was not such a terrible ordeal after all. In fact he 
liked Tonya’s mother. 

Tonya took Pavel to her own room and showed him her own 
books. 

On the dressing table stood a small mirror. Tonya led Pavel up to 
it and said with a little laugh: 

“Why do you let your hair grow wild like that? Don’t you ever cut 
it or comb it?” 

“I just shave it clean off when it grows too long. What else should 
I do with it?” Pavel said, embarrassed. 

Tonya laughed, and picking up a comb from the dressing table she 
ran it quickly a few times through his unruly locks. 

“There, that’s better,” she said as she surveyed her handiwork. 
“Hair ought to be neatly cut, you shouldn’t go around looking like 
an oaf.” 

She glanced critically at his faded brown shirt and his shabby 
trousers but made no further comment. 

Pavel noticed the glance and felt ashamed of his clothes. 

When they said goodbye, Tonya invited him to come again. She 
made him promise to come in two days’ time and go fishing with 
her. 

Pavel left the house by the simple expedient of jumping out of 
the window; he did not care to go through the other rooms and meet 
Tonya’s mother again. 

With Artem gone, things grew hard for the Korchagins. Pavel’s 


84 


wages did not suffice. Maria Yakovlevna suggested to Pavel that she 
go out to work again, especially since the Leszczinskis happened to 
be in need of a cook. But Pavel was against it. 

“No, mother, I’ll find some extra work to do. They need men at the 
sawmill to stack the timber. I’ll put in a half a day there and that’ll 
give us enough to live on. You mustn’t go to work, or Artem will be 
angry with me for not being able to get along without that.” 

His mother tried to insist, but Pavel was adamant. 

The next day Pavel was already working at the sawmill stacking 
up the freshly sawn boards to dry. There he met several lads he knew, 
Misha Levchukov, can old schoolmate of his, and Vanya Kuleshov. 
Misha and he teamed together and working at piece rates they earned 
rather well. Pavel spent his days at the sawmill and in the evenings 
went to his job at the power plant. 

On the evening of the tenth day Pavel brought his earnings to his 
mother. 

As he handed her the money, he fidgeted uneasily, blushed and 
said finally: “You know what, mother, buy me a sateen shirt, a blue 
one - like the one I had last year, remember? It’ll take about half the 
money, but don’t worry, I’ll earn some more. This shirt of mine is 
pretty shabby,” he added, as if apologising for his request. 

“Why, of course I’ll buy it for you,” said his mother, “I’ll get the 
material today, Pavlusha, and tomorrow I’ll sew it. You really do 
need a new shirt.” And she gazed tenderly at her son. 

Pavel paused at the entrance to the barbershop and fingering the 
rouble in his pocket turned into the doorway. 

The barber, a smart-looking young man, noticed him entering and 
signed toward the empty chair with his head. 

“Next, please.” 

As he settled into the deep, soft chair, Pavel saw in the mirror 
before him a flustered, confused face. 

“Clip it close?” the barber asked. 

“Yes, that is, no - well, what I want is a haircut - how do you call 
it?” Pavel floundered, making a despairing gesture with his hand. 


85 


“I understand,” the barber smiled. 

A quarter of an hour later Pavel emerged, perspiring and exhausted 
by the ordeal, but with his hair neatly trimmed and combed. The 
barber had worked hard at the recalcitrant mop, but water and the 
comb had won out in the end and the bristling tufts now lay neatly 
in place. 

Out in the street Pavel heaved a sigh of relief and pulled his cap 
down over his eyes. 

“I wonder what mother’ll say when she sees me?” he thought. 

Tonya was vexed when Pavel did not keep his promise to go 
fishing with her. 

“That stoker boy isn’t very considerate,” she thought with 
annoyance, but when several more days passed and Pavel failed to 
appear she began to long for his company. 

One day as she was about to go out for a walk, her mother looked 
into her room and said: 

“A visitor to see you, Tonya. May he come in?” 

Pavel appeared in the doorway, changed so much that Tonya 
barely recognised him at first. 

He was wearing a brand-new blue sateen shirt and dark trousers. 
His boots had been polished until they shone, and, as Tonya noted at 
once, his bristly mop had been trimmed. The grimy young stoker was 
transformed. 

Tonya was about to express her surprise, but checked herself in 
time for she did not want to embarrass the lad, who was uncomfortable 
enough as it was. So she pretended not to have noticed the striking 
change in his appearance and began scolding him instead. 

“Why didn’t you come fishing? You should be ashamed of 
yourself! Is that how you keep your promises?” 

“I’ve been working at the sawmill these days and just couldn’t 
get away.” 

He could not tell her that he had been working the last few days 
to the point of exhaustion in order to buy himself the shirt and 
trousers. 


86 


Tonya, however, guessed the truth herself and her annoyance with 
Pavel vanished. 

“Let’s go for a walk down to the pond,” she suggested, and they 
went out through the garden onto the road. 

Before long Pavel was telling Tonya about the revolver he had 
stolen from the Lieutenant, sharing his big secret with her as with 
a friend, and promising her that some day very soon they would go 
deep into the woods to do some shooting. 

“But see that you don’t give me away,” Pavel said, abruptly. 

“I shall never give you away,” Tonya vowed. 


CHAPTER FOUR 


lerce and merciless class struggle gripped the Ukraine. More 



/land more people took to arms and each clash brought forth 
new fighters. 

Gone were the days of peace and tranquillity for the respectable 
citizen. 

The little tumbledown houses shook in the storm blasts of gun 
salvos, and the respectable citizen huddled against the walls of his 
cellar or took cover in his backyard trench. 

An avalanche of Petlyura bands of all shades and hues overran the 
gubernia, led by little chieftains and big ones, all manner of Golubs, 
Archangels, Angels and Gordiuses and a host of other bandits. 

Ex-officers of the tsarist, army, Right and Left Ukrainian 
Socialist-Revolutionaries - any desperado who could muster a band 
of cutthroats, declared himself Ataman, and some raised the yellow- 
and-blue Petlyura flag and established their authority over what-ever 
area was within the scope of their strength and opportunities. 

Out of these heterogeneous bands reinforced by kulaks and the 
Galician regiments of Ataman Konovalets’ siege corps, “Chief 
Ataman” Petlyura formed his regiments and divisions. And when 


87 


Red partisan detachments struck at this Socialist-Revolutionary and 
kulak rabble the very earth trembled under the pounding of hundreds 
and thousands of hooves and the rumble of the wheels of machine- 
gun carts and gun carriages. 

In April of that turbulent 1919, the respectable citizen, dazed and 
terrified, would open his shutters of a morning and, peering out with 
sleep-heavy eyes, greet his next-door neighbour with the anxious 
question: “Avtonoma Petrovich, do you happen to know who’s in 
power today?” 

And Avtonom Petrovich would hitch up his trousers and cast a 
frightened look around. 

“Can’t say, Afanas Kirillovich. Somebody did enter the town 
during the night. Who it was we’ll find out soon enough: if they start 
robbing the Jews, we’ll know they’re Petlyura men, and if they’re 
some of the ‘comrades,’ we’ll be able to tell at once by the way they 
talk. I’m keeping an eye open myself so’s to know what portrait to 
hang up. Wouldn’t care to get into trouble like Gerasim Leontievich 
next door. You see, he didn’t look out properly and had just gone and 
hung up a picture of Lenin when three men rushed in - Petlyura men 
as it turned out. They took one look at the picture and jumped on him 
- a good twenty strokes they gave him. ‘We’ll skin you alive, you 
Communist sonofabitch,’ they shouted. And no matter how hard he 
tried to explain and how loud he yelled, nothing helped.” 

Noticing groups of anned men coming down the street the 
respectable citizen closes his windows and goes into hiding. Better to 
be on the safe side... 

As for the workers, they regarded the yellow-and-blue flags of 
the Petlyura thugs with suppressed hatred. They were powerless in 
the face of this wave of Ukrainian bourgeois chauvinism, and their 
spirits rose only when passing Red units, fighting fiercely against 
the yellow-and-blues that were bearing down on them from all sides, 
wedged their way into the town. For a day or two the red flag so dear 
to the worker’s heart would fly over the town hall, but then the unit 
would move on again and the engulfing gloom return. 


88 


Now the town was in the hands of Colonel Golub, the “hope and 
pride” of the Transdnieper Division. 

His band of two thousand cutthroats had made a triumphal entry 
into the town the day before. Pan the Colonel had ridden at the head 
of the column on a splendid black stallion. In spite of the warm April 
sun he wore a Caucasian bourka, a lambskin Zaporozhye Cossack 
cap with a raspberry-red crown, a cherkesska, and the weapons 
that went with the outfit; dagger and sabre with chased-silver hilts. 
Between his teeth he held a curve-stem pipe. 

A handsome fellow, Pan the Colonel Golub, with his black 
eyebrows and pallid complexion tinged slightly green from incessant 
carousals! 

Before the revolution Pan the Colonel had been an agronomist at 
the beet plantations of a sugar refinery, but that was a dull life not to 
be compared with the position of an Ataman, and so on the crest of 
the murky waves that swept the land the agronomist emerged as Pan 
the Colonel Golub. 

In the only theatre in town a gala affair was got up in honour of the 
new arrivals. The “flower” of the Petlyura intelligentsia was there in 
full force: Ukrainian teachers, the priest’s two daughters, the beautiful 
Anya and her younger sister Dina, some ladies of lesser standing, 
former members of the household of Count Potocki, a handful of 
petty burghers, Ukrainian S.R. scum, who called themselves “free 
Cossacks.” 

The theatre was packed. Spur-clicking officers who might have 
been copied from old paintings of Zaporozhye Cossacks pranced 
around the teachers, the priest’s daughters and the burghers’ ladies 
who were decked out in Ukrainian national costumes ornamented 
with bright-coloured embroidered flowers and multi-hued beads and 
ribbons. 

The regimental band blared. On the stage feverish preparations 
were under way for the performance of Nazar Stodolva scheduled for 
the evening. 

There was no electricity, however, and the fact was reported 


89 


in due course to Pan the Colonel at headquarters by his adjutant. 
Sublieutenant Polyantsev, who had now Ukrainianised his name 
and ra nk and styled himself Khorunzhy Palyanytsya. The Colonel, 
who intended to grace the evening with his presence, heard out 
Palyanytsya and said casually but imperiously: 

“See that there is light. Find an electrician and start the electric 
power plant if you have to break your neck doing it.” 

“Very good, Pan Colonel.” 

Khorunzhy Palyanytsya found electricians without breaking his 
neck. Within two hours Pavel, an electrician and a mechanic were 
brought to the power plant by armed guards. 

“If you don’t have the lights on by seven I’ll have all three of you 
strung up,” Palyanytsya told them curtly, pointing to an iron beam 
overhead. 

This blunt exposition of the situation had its effect and the lights 
came on at the appointed time. 

The evening was in full swing when Pan the Colonel arrived 
with his lady, the buxom yellow-haired daughter of the barkeeper 
in whose house he was staying. Her father being a man of means, 
she had been educated at the Gymnasium in the biggest town in the 
gubernia. 

When the two had taken the seats reserved for them as guests of 
honour in the front row, Pan the Colonel gave the signal and the 
curtain rose so suddenly that the audience had a glimpse of the stage 
director’s back as he hurried off the stage. 

During the play the officers and their ladies whiled away the 
time at the refreshment counter filling up on raw homemade liquor, 
supplied by the ubiquitous Palyanytsya and delicacies acquired by 
requisitioning. By the end of the performance they were all well 
under the weather. 

After the final curtain Palyanytsya leaped on the stage. 

“Ladies and gentlemen, the dancing will begin at once,” he 
announced with a theatrical sweep of his arm. 

There was general applause and the audience emptied out into the 


90 


yard to give the Petlyura soldiers posted to guard the guests, a chance 
to carry out the chairs and clear the dance floor. 

A half an hour later the theatre was the scene of wild revelry. 

The Petlyura officers, flinging all restraint to the winds, furiously 
danced the hopak with local belles flushed from the heat, and the 
pounding of heavy boots rocked the walls of the ramshackle theatre 
building. 

In the meantime a troop of armed horsemen was approaching 
the town from the direction of the flour mill. A Petlyura sentry-post 
stationed at the town limits sprang in alarm to their machine guns 
and there was a clicking of breech blocks in the night. Through the 
darkness came the sharp challenge: 

“Halt! Who goes there?” 

Two dark figures loomed out of the darkness. One of them stepped 
forward and roared out in a hoarse bass: a 

“Ataman Pavlyuk with his detachment. Who are you? Golub’s 
men?” 

“That’s right,” replied an officer who had also stepped forward. 

“Where can I billet my men?” Pavlyuk asked. 

“I’ll phone headquarters at once,” replied the officer and 
disappeared into a tiny hut on the roadside. 

A minute later he came out and began issuing orders: “Clear the 
machine gun off the road, men! Let the Pan Ataman pass.” 

Pavlyuk reined in his horse in front of the brightly illuminated 
theatre where a great many people were strolling out in the open air. 

“Some fun going on here by the look of it, he said, turning to 
the horseman beside him. “Let’s dismount, Gukmach, and join the 
merrymaking. We’ll pick ourselves a couple of girls - I see the place 
is thick with them. Hey, Stalezhko,” he shouted. “You billet the lads 
with the townsfolk, we’ll stop here. Escort, follow me.” And he 
heaved himself heavily from his staggering mount. 

At the entrance to the theatre Pavlyuk was stopped by two anned 
Petlyura men. 

“Tickets?” 


91 


Pavlyuk gave them a derisive look and pushed one of them aside 
with his shoulder. The dozen men with him followed suit. All of them 
had horses outside, tethered to the fence. 

The newcomers were noticed at once. Particularly conspicuous 
was the huge frame of Pavlyuk; he was wearing an officer’s coat 
of good cloth, blue breeches of the kind worn in the guards, and a 
shaggy fur cap. A Mauser pistol hung from a strap slung over his 
shoulder and a hand grenade stuck out of his pocket. 

“Who’s that?” the whisper passed through the crowd around the 
dance floor where Golub’s second in command was executing a wild 
dance. 

His partner was the priest’s elder daughter, who was whirling 
round with such abandon that her skirts flared out high enough to 
give the delighted warriors standing about a good view of her silk 
underthings. 

Elbowing his way through the crowd, Pavlyuk went right out onto 
the dance floor. 

Pavlyuk stared with glazed eyes at the priest’s daughter’s legs, 
passed his tongue over his dry lips, then strode across the dance 
floor to the orchestra platform, stopped, and flicked his plaited 
riding whip. 

“Come on, give us the hopak’.'’' 

The conductor paid no attention to the order. 

A sharp movement of Pavlyuk’s hand and the whip cut down the 
conductor’s back. The latter jumped as if stung and the music broke 
off, plunging the hall into silence. 

“What insolence!” The barkeeper’s daughter was furious. “You 
can’t let him do that,” she cried, clutching at the elbow of Golub 
seated at her side. 

Golub heaved himself to his feet, kicked aside a chair, took 
three paces forward and stopped face to face with Pavlyuk. He had 
recognised the newcomer at once, and he had scores to settle with this 
rival claimant for local power. Only a week ago Pavlyuk had played 
the most scurvy trick on Pan the Colonel. At the height of a battle 


92 


with a Red regiment which had mauled Golub’s detachment on more 
than one occasion, Pavlyuk, instead of striking at the Bolsheviks 
from the rear, had broken into a town, overcome the resistance of the 
small pickets the Reds had left there, and, leaving a screening force 
to protect himself, sacked the place in the most thorough fashion. 
Of course, being a true Petlyura man, he saw to it that the Jewish 
population were the chief victims. In the meantime the Reds had 
smashed up Golub’s right flank and made their way out of the trap. 

And now this arrogant cavalry Captain had burst in here and had 
the audacity to strike Pan the Colonel’s own bandmaster under his 
very eyes. No, this was too much. Golub knew that if he did not put 
the conceited petty Ataman in his place his prestige in the regiment 
would be gone. 

For several seconds the two men stood there in silence glaring at 
each other. 

Gripping the hilt of his sabre with one hand and feeling for the 
revolver in his pocket with the other, Golub rapped out: 

“How dare you lay your hands on my men, you scoundrel!” 

Pavlyuk’s hand crept toward the grip of the Mauser. 

“Easy there, Pan Golub, easy, or you may trip yourself up. Don’t 
step on my pet corn. I’m liable to lose my temper.” 

This was more than Golub could stand. 

“Throw them out and give them twenty-five lashes each!” he 
shouted. 

The officers fell upon Pavlyuk and his men like a pack of 
hounds. 

A shot crashed out with a report that sounded as if an electric bulb 
had been smashed against the floor, and the struggling men swirled 
and spun down the hall like two packs of fighting dogs. In the wild 
melee men slashed at each other with sabres and dug their fingers into 
hair and throats, while the women, squealing with terror like stuck 
pigs, scattered away from the contestants. 

In a few minutes Pavlyuk and his followers, disarmed and beaten, 
were dragged out of the hall, and thrown out into the street. 


93 


Pavlyuk himself lost his fur hat in the scrimmage, his face was 
bruised and his weapons were gone, and now he was beside himself 
with rage. He and his men leapt into the saddle and galloped down 
the street. 

The evening was broken up. No one felt inclined to make merry 
after what had happened. The women refused to dance and insisted 
on being taken home, but Golub would not hear of it. 

“Post sentries,” he ordered. “Nobody is to leave the hall.” 

Palyanytsya hastened to carry out the orders. 

“The dancing will continue until morning, ladies and gentlemen,” 
Golub replied stubbornly to the protests that showered upon him. “I 
shall dance the first waltz myself.” 

The orchestra struck up again but there was to be no more 
frolicking that night nevertheless. 

The Colonel had not circled the dance floor once with the priest’s 
daughter when the sentries ran into the hall shouting: “Pavlyuk’s 
surrounding the theatre!” 

At that moment a window facing the street crashed in and the 
snub-nosed muzzle of a machine gun was pushed in through the 
shattered window frame. It moved stupidly this way and that, as if 
picking out the figures scattering wildly away from it to-ward the 
centre of the hall as from the devil himself. 

Palyanytsya fired at the thousand-candle-power lamp in the 
ceiling which exploded like a bomb, sending a shower of splintered 
glass down on everyone in the hall. 

The hall was plunged in darkness. Someone shouted in the yard: 

“Everybody get outside!” A stream of violent abuse followed. 

The wild, hysterical screams of the women, the furious commands 
issued by Golub as he dashed about the hall trying to rally his officers 
who had completely lost their heads, the firing and shouting out in 
the yard all merged into an indescribable pandemonium. In the panic 
nobody noticed Palyanytsya slip through the back door into a deserted 
side street and run for all he was worth to Golub’s headquarters. 

A half an hour later a full-dress battle was raging in the town. 


94 


The silence of the night was shattered by the incessant crackling of 
rifle fire interspersed with the rattle of machine guns. Completely 
stupefied, the townsfolk leapt up from their warm beds and pressed 
against window panes. 

At last the firing abated, and only one machine gun somewhere in 
the outskirts kept up a sporadic shooting like the barking of a dog. 

The fighting died down as the glimmer of dawn appeared on the 
horizon... 

Rumours that a pogrom was brewing crept through the town, 
finally reaching the tiny, low-roofed Jewish cottages with crooked 
windows that somehow managed to cling to the top of the muddy 
bluff overlooking the river. In these incredibly overcrowded hovels 
called houses lived the Jewish poor. 

The compositors and other workers at the printshop where Sergei 
Bruzzhak had been working for more than a year were Jews. Strong 
bonds of friendship had sprung up between them and Sergei. Like a 
closely-knit family, they stood solid against their employer, the smug 
well-fed Mr. Blumstein. An incessant struggle went on between the 
proprietor and the printers. Blumstein did his best to grab more and 
pay his workers less. The printers had gone on strike several times 
and the printshop had stood idle for two or three weeks running. 
There were fourteen of them. Sergei, the youngest, spent twelve 
hours a day turning the wheel of a hand press. 

Today Sergei noticed an ominous uneasiness among the workers. 
For the past several troubled months the shop had had little to do 
apart from printing occasional proclamations issued by the “Chief 
Ataman.” 

A consumptive compositor named Mendel called Sergei into a 
comer. 

“Do you kn ow there’s a pogrom coming?” he said, looking at the 
boy with his sad eyes. 

Sergei looked up in surprise. 

“No, I hadn’t the slightest idea.” 


95 


Mendel laid a withered, yellow hand on Sergei’s shoulder and 
spoke in a confiding, paternal tone. 

“There’s going to be a pogrom - that’s a fact. The Jews are going 
to be beaten up. What I want to know is this - will you help your 
comrades in this calamity or not?” 

“Of course I will, if I only can. What can I do, Mendel?” 

The compositors were now listening to the conversation. 

“You’re a good boy, Seryozha, and we trust you. After all, your 
father’s a worker like us. Now you run home and ask him whether he 
would agree to hide some old men and women at his place, and then 
we’ll decide who they will be. Ask your people if there’s anyone else 
they kn ow willing to do the same. The Russians will be safe from 
these bandits for the time being. Run along, Seryozha, there’s no time 
to waste.” 

“You can count on me, Mendel. I’ll see Pavka and Klimka right 
away - their folks are sure to take in somebody.” 

“Just a minute,” Mendel anxiously halted Sergei who was about to 
leave. “Who are Pavka and Klimka? Do you kn ow them well?” 

Sergei nodded confidently. 

“Of course. They’re my pals. Pavka Korchagin’s brother is a 
mechanic.” 

“Ah, Korchagin,” Mendel was reassured. “I know him - used 
to live in the same house. Yes, you can see the Korchagins. Go, 
Seryozha, and bring back an answer as soon as you can. 

Sergei shot out into the street. 

The pogrom began on the third day after the pitched battle between 
the Pavlyuk detachment and Golub’s men. 

Pavlyuk, routed and driven out of Shepetovka, had cleared out 
of the neighbourhood and seized a small town nearby. The night 
encounter in Shepetovka had cost him a score of men. Similar losses 
had been sustained by the Golub crowd. 

The dead were hastily carted off to the cemetery and buried the 
same day without much ceremony, for there was nothing to boast 


96 


about in the whole affair. The two Atamans had flown at each other’s 
throats like two stray curs, and to make a fuss over the funeral would 
have been unseemly. True, Palyanytsya had wanted to make a big 
thing of it and declare Pavlyuk a Red bandit, but the Committee 
headed by the priest Vasili objected. 

The skirmish evoked some grumbling in Golub’s regiment, 
especially among his bodyguard which had sustained the heaviest 
losses, and to put an end to the dissatisfaction and bolster up 
spirits, Palyanytsya proposed staging a pogrom, to provide “a little 
diversion” for the men, was the cynical way he broached the subject 
to Golub. He argued that this was essential in view of the disaffection 
in the unit. And although the Colonel was loathe to disturb the peace 
in the town on the eve of his marriage to the barkeeper’s daughter, 
he finally gave in. 

True, Pan the Colonel was somewhat reluctant to undertake the 
operation in view also of his recent admission into the S. R. Party. 
His enemies might again drag his name into disrepute and call him a 
pogrom-monger, and without doubt would slander him to the “Chief 
Ataman.” So far, however, Golub was not greatly dependent on the 
“Chief,” since he foraged for himself. Besides, the “Chief’ knew very 
well what riffraff he had serving under him, and himself had time and 
again demanded money for the Directory’s needs from the so-called 
requisitions; as for the reputation of a pogrommonger, Golub already 
had quite a record in that respect. There was very little that he could 
add to it now. 

The pogrom began early in the morning. 

The town was still wrapped in the grey mist that precedes the 
break of day. The deserted streets which wound like wet strips of 
linen around the haphazardly built blocks of the Jewish quarter were 
lifeless. The tightly curtained and shuttered windows stared out with 
blind eyes. 

Outwardly the quarter appeared to be immersed in sound early- 
morning slumber, but inside the houses there was no sleep. Entire 
families, fully dressed, huddled together in one room, preparing 


97 


themselves for the impending disaster. Only children too young to 
realise what was happening slept peacefully in their mothers’ arms. 

Salomyga, the chief of Golub’s bodyguard, a dark fellow with 
the swarthy complexion of a gypsy and a livid sabre-scar across his 
cheek, worked hard that morning to wake up Golub’s aide. It was 
a painful awakening for Palyanytsya - he could not shake himself 
loose from the nightmare that had beset him all night; the grimacing, 
hunchbacked devil was still clawing at his throat. At last he raised his 
splitting head and saw Salomyga. 

“Get up, you souse,” Salomyga was shaking him by the shoulder. 
“It’s high time to get down to business. You had one too many!” 

Palyanytsya, now wide awake, sat up and, his face twisting from 
heartburn, spat out the bitter saliva that filled his mouth. 

“What business?” he stared blankly at Salomyga. 

“To rip up the sheenies, what else? You haven’t forgotten, I 
hope.” 

It all came back to Palyanytsya. True enough, he had forgotten 
about it. The drinking bout at the farm where Pan the Colonel had 
retired with his fiancee and a handful of boon companions had been 
a heavy one. 

Golub had found it convenient to leave town for the duration of the 
pogrom, for afterwards he could put it down to a misunderstanding 
in his absence, and in the meantime Palyanytsya would have ample 
opportunity to make a thorough job of it. Yes, Palyanytsya was an 
expert when it came to providing “diversion!” 

Palyanytsya poured a pail of water over his head and, thus sobered, 
was soon striding about headquarters issuing orders. 

The bodyguard hundred was already in the saddle. To avoid 
possible complications, the farsighted Palyanytsya ordered pickets 
posted between the town proper and the workers’ quarters and the 
station. A machine gun was mounted in the Leszczinski garden 
facing the road in order to meet the workers with a squall of lead if 
they took it into their heads to interfere. 


98 


When all the preparations were complete, the aide and Salomyga 
leapt into the saddle. 

“Halt, I nearly forgot,” Palyanytsya said when they had already set 
out. “Get two carts to bring back Golub’s wedding present. Ha-ha-ha! 
The first spoils as always to the commander, and the first girl, ha-ha- 
ha, for his aide - and that’s me. Got it, you block-head?” 

The last remark was addressed to Salomyga, who glared back at 
him with jaundiced eyes. 

“There’ll be enough for everybody.” 

They spurred their horses down the highway, the aide and 
Salomyga leading the disorderly mob of mounted men. 

The mist had lifted when Palyanytsya reined in his horse in front 
of a two-story house with a rusty sign reading “Fuchs, Draper.” 

His thin-shanked grey mare nervously stamped her hoof against 
the cobblestones. 

“Well, with God’s help we’ll begin here,” Palyanytsya said as he 
jumped to the ground. 

“Off your horses, fellows,” he turned to the men crowding around 
him. “The show’s beginning. Now I don’t want any heads bashed, 
there’ll be a time for that. As for the girls, if you can manage it, hold 
out until evening.” 

One of the men bared his strong teeth and protested: “Now then 
Pan Khorunzhy, what if it’s by mutual consent?” 

There was loud guffawing all around. Palyanytsya eyed the man 
who had spoken with admiring approbation. 

“Now that’s another story - if they’re willing, go right ahead, 
nobody can prohibit that.” 

Palyanytsya went up to the closed door of the store and kicked at it 
hard, but the sturdy oaken planka did not so much as tremble. 

This was clearly the wrong place to begin. Palyanytsya rounded 
the comer of the house and headed for the door leading to Fuchs’ 
apartment, supporting his sabre with his hand as he went. Salomyga 
followed. 

The people inside the house had heard the clatter of hooves on the 


99 


pavement outside and when the sound ceased in front of the shop and 
the men’s voices carried through the walls their hearts seemed to stop 
beating and their bodies petrified. 

The wealthy Fuchs had left town the day before with his wife and 
daughters, leaving his servant Riva, a gentle timid girl of nineteen, to 
look after his property. Seeing that she shrank from remaining alone 
in the deserted apartment he had suggested that she bring her old 
father and mother to stay with her until his return. 

When Riva had tried meekly to protest, the cunning merchant had 
assured her that in all probability there would be no pogrom at all, for 
what could they expect to get from beggars? And he promised Riva 
to give her a piece of stuff for a dress when he returned. 

Now the three waited in fear and trembling, hoping against hope 
that the men would ride past; perhaps they had been mistaken, 
perhaps it had only seemed that the horses had stopped in front of 
their house. But their hopes were dashed by the dull reverberation of 
a blow at the shop door. 

Old, silvery-haired Peisakh stood in the doorway, his blue eyes 
wide open like a frightened child’s, and he whispered a prayer to 
almighty Jehovah with all the passion of the fanatical believer. He 
prayed to God to protect this house from misfortune and for a while 
the old woman standing beside him could not hear the approaching 
footsteps for the mumble of his supplication. 

Riva had fled to the farthest room where she hid behind the big 
oaken sideboard. 

A shattering blow at the door sent a convulsive tremor through the 
two old people. 

“Open the door!” Another blow, still more violent than the first, 
descended on the door, followed by furious curses. 

But those within, numb with fright, could not lift a hand to 
unfasten the door. 

Outside the rifle butts pounded until the bolts gave way and the 
splintering door crashed open. 

The house filled with armed men who went through its every 


100 


comer. A blow from a rifle butt smashed in the door leading into the 
store and the front door bolts were drawn from within. 

The looting began. 

When the carts had been piled high with bolts of cloth, shoes 
and other loot, Salomyga set out with the booty to Golub’s quarters. 
When he returned he heard a shriek of terror issuing from the 
house. 

Palyanytsya, leaving his men to sack the store, had walked into the 
proprietor’s apartment and found the old folks and the girl standing 
there. Casting his green lynx-like eyes over them he snapped at the 
old couple: 

“Get out of here!” 

Neither mother nor father stirred. 

Palyanytsya took a step forward and slowly drew his sabre. 

“Mama!” the girl gave a heart-rending scream. It was this that 
Salomyga heard. 

Palyanytsya turned to his men who had run in at the cry. 

“Throw them out!” he barked, pointing at the two old people. 
When this had been done he told Salomyga who had now come on 
the scene: “You watch here at the door while I have a chat with the 
wench.” 

The girl screamed again. Old Peisakh made a rush for the door 
leading into the room, but a violent blow in the chest sent him reeling 
back against the wall, choking from the pain. Like a she-wolf fighting 
for her young, Toiba, the old mother, always so quiet and sub-missive, 
now flung herself at Salomyga. 

“Let me in! What are you doing to my girl?” 

She was struggling to get to the door and try as he might Salomyga 
could not break the convulsive grip of the aged fingers on his coat. 

Peisakh, now recovered from the shock and pain, came to Toiba’s 
assistance. 

“Let us pass! Let us pass! Oh my daughter!” 

Between them the old couple managed to push Salomyga away 
from the door. Enraged, he jerked his revolver from under his belt 


101 


and brought the steel grip down hard upon the old man’s grey head. 
Peisakh crumpled to the floor. 

Inside the room Riva was screaming. 

When Toiba was dragged out of the house she was out of her mind, 
and the street echoed to her wild shrieks and entreaties for help. 

Inside the house everything was quiet. 

Palyanytsya came out of the room. Without looking at Salomyga 
whose hand was already on the door handle, he stopped the latter 
from entering. 

“No use going in - she choked when I tried to shut her up with a 
pillow.” As he stepped over Peisakh’s body he put his foot into a dark 
sticky mess. 

“Not such a good beginning.” he muttered as he went outside. 

The others followed him without a word, leaving behind bloody 
footprints on the floor and the stairs. 

Pillage was in full swing in the town. Brief savage clashes flared 
up between brigands who could not agree as to the division of the 
spoils, and here and there sabres flashed. And almost everywhere 
fists flailed without restraint. From the beer saloon twenty-five gallon 
kegs were being rolled out onto the sidewalk. 

Then the looters began to break into Jewish homes. 

There was no resistance. They went through the rooms, hastily 
turned every corner upside down, and went away laden with booty, 
leaving behind disordered heaps of clothing and the fluttering 
contents of ripped feather beds and pillows. The first day took a toll 
of only two victims: Riva and her father; but the oncoming night 
carried with it the unavoidable menace of death. 

By evening the motley crew of scavengers was roaring drunk. The 
crazed Petlyura men were waiting for the night. 

Darkness released them from the last restraint. It is easier to 
destroy man in the pit of night; even the jackal prefers the hours of 
gloom. 

Few would ever forget these two terrible nights and three days. 
How many crushed and mangled lives they left behind, how many 


102 


youthful heads turned grey in these bloody hours, how many bitter 
tears were shed! It is hard to tell whether those were the more 
fortunate who were left to live with souls desolated, in the agony of 
shame and humiliation, gnawed by in-describable grief, grief for near 
and dear ones who would never return. Indifferent to all this in the 
narrow alleys lay the lacerated, tormented, broken bodies of young 
girls with arms thrown back in convulsive gestures of agony. 

Only at the very riverfront, in the house where Naum the 
blacksmith lived, the jackals who fell upon his young wife Sarah got 
a fierce rebuff. The smith, a man of powerful build in the prime of 
his twenty-four years and with the steel muscles of one who wielded 
the sledgehammer for a living, did not yield his mate. In a brief 
but furious clash in the tiny cottage the skulls of two Petlyura men 
were crushed like so many rotten melons. With the terrible fury of 
despair, the smith fought fiercely for two lives, and for a long time 
the dry crackle of rifle fire could be heard from the river bank where 
the brigands now rushed, sensing the danger. With only one round 
of ammunition left, the smith mercifully shot his wife, and himself 
rushed out to his death, bayonet in hand. He was met by a squall of 
lead and his powerful body crashed to the ground outside his front 
door. 

Prosperous peasants from nearby villages drove into town in 
carts drawn by well-fed horses, loaded their wagon boxes with 
whatever met their fancy, and, escorted by sons and relatives 
serving in Golub’s force, hurried home so as to make another trip or 
two to town and back. 

Seryozha Bruzzhak, who together with his father had hidden half 
of his printshop comrades in the cellar and attic, was crossing the 
garden on his way home when he saw a man in a long, patched coat 
running up the road, violently swinging his arms. 

It was an old Jew, and behind the bareheaded, panting man 
whose features were paralysed with mortal terror, galloped 
a Petlyura man on a grey horse. The distance between them 
dwindled fast and the mounted man leaned forward in the saddle 


103 


to cut down his victim. Hearing the hoofbeats behind him, the old 
man threw up his hands as if to ward off the blow. At that moment 
Seryozha leapt onto the road and threw himself in front of the 
horse to protect the ancient. 

“Leave him alone, you dog of a bandit!” 

The rider, making no effort to stay the descending sabre, brought 
the flat of the blade down on the fair young head. 


CHAPTER FIVE 


T he Red forces were pressing down hard on “Chief Ataman” 
Petlyura’s units, and Golub’s regiment was called to the front. 
Only a small rearguard detachment and the Commandant’s detail 
were left in the town. 

The people stirred. The Jewish section of the population took 
advantage of the temporary lull to bury their dead, and life returned 
once again to the tiny huts of the Jewish quarter. 

On quiet evenings an indistinct rumble carried from the distance; 
somewhere not too far off the fighting was in progress. 

At the station railwaymen were leaving their jobs to roam the 
countryside in search of work. 

The Gymnasium was closed. 

Martial law was declared in town. 

It was a black, ugly night, one of those nights when the eyes, 
strain as they might, cannot pierce the gloom, and a man gropes 
about blindly expecting at any moment to fall into a ditch and break 
his neck. 

The respectable citizen knows that at a time like this it is safer to 
sit at home in the dark; he will not light a lamp if he can help it, for 
light might attract unwelcome guests. Better the dark, much safer. 
There are of course those who are always restless - let them venture 


104 


abroad if they wish, that’s none of the respectable citizen’s business. 
But he himself will not risk going out - not for anything. 

It was one of those nights, yet there was a man abroad. 

Making his way to the Korchagin house, he knocked cautiously at 
the window. There was no answer and he knocked again, louder and 
more insistently. 

Pavel dreamt that a queer creature, anything but human, was aiming 
a machine gun at him; he wanted to flee, but there was nowhere to go, 
and the machine gun had broken into a terrifying chatter. 

He woke up to find the window rattling. Someone was knocking. 

Pavel jumped out of bed and went to the window to see who it 
was, but all he could make out was a vague dark shape. 

He was all alone in the house. His mother had gone on a visit to 
his eldest sister, whose husband was a mechanic at the sugar refinery. 
And Artem was black-smithing in a neighbouring village, wielding 
the sledge for his keep. 

Yet it could only be Artem. 

Pavel decided to open the window. 

“Who’s there?” he said into the darkness. 

There was a movement outside the window and a muffled 
bass replied: 

“Its me, Zhukhrai.” 

Two hands were laid on the window sill and then Fyodor’s head 
came up until it was level with Pavel’s face. 

“I’ve come to spend the night with you. Any objections, mate?” 
Zhukhrai whispered. 

“Of course not,” Pavel replied wannly. “You know you’re always 
welcome. Climb in.” 

Fyodor squeezed his great bulk through the opening. 

He closed the window but did not move away from the window 
at once. He stood listening intently, and when the moon slipped 
out from behind a cloud and the road became visible he scanned it 
carefully. Then he turned to Pavel. 

“We won’t wake up your mother, will we?” 


105 


Pavel told him there was nobody home besides himself. The sailor 
felt more at ease and spoke in a louder voice. 

“Those cutthroats are after my hide in earnest now, matey. They’ve 
got it in for me after what happened over at the station. If our fellows 
would stick together a bit more we could have given the greycoats a 
fine reception during the pogrom. But folks, as you see, aren’t ready 
to plunge into the fire yet, and so nothing came of it. Now they’re 
looking for me, twice they’ve had the dragnet out - today I got away 
by the skin of my teeth. I was going home, you see, by the back way 
of course, and had just stopped at the shed to look around, when I saw 
a bayonet sticking out from behind a tree trunk. I naturally cast off 
and headed for your place. If you’ve got nothing against it I’ll drop 
anchor here for a few days. All right, mate? Good.” 

Zhukhrai, still breathing heavily, began pulling off his mud- 
splashed boots. 

Pavel was glad he had come. The power plant had not been 
working latterly and Pavel found the deserted house a lonely place. 

They went to bed. Pavel fell asleep at once, but Fyodor lay awake 
for a long time smoking. Presently he rose and, tiptoeing on bare feet 
to the window, stared out for a long time into the street. Finally, over¬ 
come by fatigue, he lay down and fell asleep, but his hand remained 
on the butt of the heavy Colt which he had tucked under the pillow, 
warming it with his body. 

Zhukhrai’s unexpected arrival that night and the eight days spent 
in his company influenced the whole course of Pavel’s life. The 
sailor gave him his first insight into much that was new, stirring and 
significant. 

The two ambushes laid for him had driven Zhukhrai into a 
mousetrap, and he now made use of his enforced idleness to pass on 
to the eager Pavel all his passionate fury and burning hatred for the 
Yellow-and-Blues who were throttling the area. 

Zhukhrai spoke in language that was vivid, lucid and simple. He 
had no doubts, his path lay clearly before him, and Pavel came to 
see that all this tangle of political parties with high-sounding names 


106 


- Socialist-Revolutionaries, Social-Democrats, Polish Socialists 

- was a collection of vicious enemies of the workers, and that the 
only revolutionary party which steadfastly fought against the rich 
was the Bolshevik Party. 

Formerly Pavel had been hopelessly confused about ah this. 

And so this staunch, stout-hearted Baltic sailor weathered by 
sea squalls, a confirmed Bolshevik, who had been a member of the 
Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party (Bolsheviks) since 1915, 
taught Pavel the harsh truths of life, and the young stoker listened 
spellbound. 

“I was something like you, matey, when I was young,” he said. 
“Just didn’t know what to do with my energy, a restless youngster 
always ready to kick over the traces. I was brought up in poverty, 
and at times the very sight of those pampered, well-fed sons of the 
town gentry made me see red. Often enough I beat them up badly, but 
ah I got out of it was a proper trouncing from my father. You can’t 
change things by carrying on a lone fight. You, Pavlusha, have ah the 
makings of a good fighter in the workingman’s cause, only you’re 
still very young and you don’t know much about the class struggle. 
I’ll put you on the right road, matey, because I know you’ll make 
good. I can’t stand the quiet, smug sort. The whole world’s afire now. 
The slaves have risen and the old life’s got to be scuttled. But to do 
that we need stout fellows, no sissies, who’ll go crawling into cracks 
like so many cockroaches when the fighting starts, but men with guts 
who’ll hit out without mercy.” 

His fist crashed down on the table. 

He got up, frowning, and paced up and down the room with hands 
thrust deep in his pockets. 

His inactivity depressed him. He bitterly regretted having stayed 
behind in this town, and believing any further stay to be pointless, 
was firmly resolved to make his way through the front to meet the 
Red units. 

A group of nine Party members would remain in town to carry on 
the work. 


107 


“They’ll manage without me. I can’t sit around any longer doing 
nothing. I’ve wasted ten months as it is,” Zhukhrai thought irritably. 

“What exactly are you, Fyodor?” Pavel once asked him. 

Zhukhrai got up and shoved his hands into his pockets. He did not 
grasp the meaning of the question at first. 

“Don’t you know?” 

“I think you’re a Bolshevik or a Communist,” Pavel said in a low 
voice. 

Zhukhrai burst out laughing, slapping his massive chest in its 
tight-fitting striped jersey. 

“Right enough, matey! It’s as much a fact as that Bolshevik and 
Communist are one and the same thing.” Suddenly he grew serious. 
“But now that you’ve grasped that much, remember it’s not to be 
mentioned to anyone or anywhere, if you don’t want them to draw 
and quarter me. Understand?” 

“I understand,” Pavel replied firmly. 

Voices were heard from the yard and the door was pushed open 
without a preliminary knock. Zhukhrai’s hand slipped into his 
pocket, but emerged again when Sergei Bruzzhak, thin and pale with 
a bandage on his head, entered the room, followed by Valya and 
Klimka. 

“Hallo, old man,” Sergei shook Pavel’s hand and smiled. “Decided 
to pay you a visit, all three of us. Valya wouldn’t let me go out alone, 
and Klimka is afraid to let her go by herself. He may be a redhead but 
he kn ows what he’s about.” 

Valya playfully clapped her hand over his mouth. 

“Chatterbox,” she laughed. “He won’t give Klimka any peace 
today.” 

Klimka revealed a row of white teeth in a good-natured grin. 

“What can you do with a sick fellow? Brain pan’s damaged, as 
you can see.” 

They all laughed. 

Sergei, who had not yet recovered from the effects of the sabre 
blow, settled on Pavel’s bed and soon the young people were engaged 


108 


in a lively conversation. Sergei, usually so gay and cheerful, was 
now quiet and depressed. He told Zhukhrai of his encounter with the 
Petlyura man. 

Zhukhrai knew the three young people, for he had visited the 
Bruzzhaks on several occasions. He liked these youngsters; they 
had not yet found their place in the vortex of the struggle, but the 
aspirations of their class were so clearly expressed in them. He 
listened with interest to the young people’s account of how they 
had helped to shelter Jewish families in their homes to save them 
from the pogrom. That evening he told the young folk much about 
the Bolsheviks, about Lenin, helping them to understand what was 
happening. 

It was quite late when Pavel saw off his guests. 

Zhu kh rai went out every evening and returned late at night; before 
leaving town he had to discuss with the comrades who would remain 
in town the work they would have to do. 

This particular night Zhukhrai did not come back. When Pavel 
woke up in the morning he saw at a glance that the sailor’s bed had 
not been slept in. 

Seized by some vague premonition, Pavel dressed hurriedly and 
left the house. Locking the door and putting the key in the usual 
place, he went to Klimka’s house hoping that the latter would have 
some news of Fyodor. Klimka’s mother, a stocky woman with a broad 
face pitted with pockmarks, was doing the wash. To Pavel’s question 
whether she knew where Fyodor was she replied curtly: 

“You’d think I’d nothing else to do but keep an eye on your 
Fyodor. It’s all through him - the devil take him - that Zozulikha had 
the house turned upside down. What’ve you got to do with him? A 
queer lot, if you ask me. Klimka and you and the rest of them....” She 
turned back in anger to her washtub. 

Klimka’s mother was an ill-tempered woman, with a biting 
tongue... 

From Klimka’s house Pavel went to Sergei’s. There too he voiced 
his fears. 


109 


“Why should you be so worried?” Valya intervened. “Perhaps 
he stayed over at some friend’s place.” But her words lacked 
confidence. 

Pavel was too restless to stop at the Bruzzhaks’ for long and 
although they tried to persuade him to stay for dinner he took his 
leave. 

He headed back home in hopes of finding Zhukhrai there. 

The door was locked. Pavel stood outside for a while with a heavy 
heart; he couldn’t bear the thought of going into the deserted house. 

For a few minutes he stood in the yard deep in thought, then, 
moved by an impulse, he went into the shed. He climbed up under the 
roof and brushing away the cobwebs reached into his secret hiding 
place and brought out the heavy Mannlicher wrapped in rags. 

He left the shed and went down to the station, strangely elated by 
the feel of the revolver weighing down his pocket. 

But there was no news of Zhukhrai at the station. 

On the way back his step slowed down as he drew alongside 
the now familiar garden of the forest warden. Hoping he knew not 
for what he looked up at the windows of the house, but it was as 
lifeless as the garden. When he had passed the garden he turned back 
to glance at the paths now covered with a rusty crop of last year’s 
leaves. The place seemed desolate and neglected - no industrious 
hand had laid a visible imprint here - and the dead stillness of the big 
old house made Pavel feel sadder still. 

His last quarrel with Tonya had been the most serious they had 
had. It had all happened quite unexpectedly, nearly a month ago. 

As he slowly walked back to town, his hands shoved deep into his 
pockets, Pavel recalled how it had come about. 

They had met quite by chance on the road and Tonya had invited 
him over to her place. 

“Dad and mother are going to a birthday party at the Bolshanskys, 
and I’ll be all alone. Why don’t you come over, Pavlusha? I have 
a very interesting book we could read - Leonid Andreyev’s Sashka 


110 


Zhigulyov. I’ve already finished it, but I’d like to reread it with you. 
I’m sure it would be a nice evening. Will you come?” 

Her big, wide-open eyes looked at him expectantly from under the 
white bonnet she wore over her thick chestnut hair. 

“I’ll come.” 

At that they parted. 

Pavel hurried to his machines, and at the very thought that he had 
a whole evening with Tonya to look forward to, the flames in the 
firebox seemed to bum more brightly and the burning logs to crackle 
more merrily than usual. 

When he knocked at the wide front door that evening it was a 
slightly disconcerted Tonya who answered. 

“I have visitors tonight. I didn’t expect them, Pavlusha. But you 
must come in,” she said. 

Pavel wanted to leave and turned to the door. 

“Come on in,” she took him by the arm. “It’ll do them good 
to know you.” And putting her arm around his waist, she led him 
through the dining room into her own room. 

As they entered she turned to the young people seated there and 
smiled. 

“I want you to meet my friend Pavel Korchagin.” 

There were three people sitting around the small table in the 
middle of the room: Liza Sukharko, a pretty, dark-complexioned 
Gymnasium student with a pouting little mouth and a fetching 
coiffure, a lanky youth wearing a well-tailored black jacket, his sleek 
hair shining with hair-oil, and a vacant look in his grey eyes, and 
between them, in a foppish school jacket, Victor Leszczinski. It was 
him Pavel saw first when Tonya opened the door. 

Leszczinski too recognised Korchagin at once and his fine arched 
eyebrows lifted in surprise. 

For a few seconds Pavel stood silent at the door, eyeing Victor 
with frank hostility. Tonya hastened to break the awkward silence by 
asking Pavel to come in and turning to Liza to introduce her. 


Ill 


Liza Sukharko, who was inspecting the new arrival with interest, 
rose from her chair. 

Pavel, however, spun around sharply and strode out through the 
semi-dark dining room to the front door. He was already on the porch 
when Tonya over-took him and seized him by the shoulders. 

“Why are you running off? I especially wanted them to meet 
you.” 

Pavel removed her hands from his shoulders and replied sharply: 

“I’m not going to be put on a show before that dummy. I don’t 
belong to that crowd - you may like them, but I hate them. If I’d 
kn own they were your friends I’d never have come.” 

Tonya, suppressing her rising anger, interrupted him: 

“What right have you to speak to me like that? I don’t ask you who 
your friends are and who comes to see you.” 

“I don’t care whom you see, only I’m not coming here any more,” 
Pavel shot hack at her as he went down the front steps. He ran to the 
garden gate. 

He had not seen Tonya since then. During the pogrom, when 
together with the electrician he had given shelter to Jewish families 
at the power station, he had forgotten about the quarrel, and today he 
wanted to see her again. 

Zhukhrai’s disappearance and the knowledge that there was no 
one at home depressed Pavel. The grey stretch of road swung to the 
right ahead of him. The spring mud had not yet dried, and the road 
was pitted with holes filled with brown mire. Beyond a house whose 
shabby, peeling facade jutted out onto the edge of the pavement the 
road forked off. 

Victor Leszczinski was saying goodbye to Liza at the street 
intersection opposite a wrecked stand with a splintered door and an 
inverted “Mineral Water” sign. 

He held her hand in his as he spoke, pleadingly gazing into her 
eyes. 

“You will come? You won’t deceive me?” 


112 


“Of course I shall come. You must wait for me,” Liza replied 
coquettishly. 

And as she left him she smiled at him with promise in her misty 
hazel eyes. 

A few yards further down the street Liza saw two men emerge 
from behind a corner onto the roadway. The first was a sturdy, 
broadchested man in worker’s clothes, his unbuttoned jacket 
revealing a striped jersey underneath, a black cap pulled down over 
his fore-head, and brown, low-topped boots on his feet. There was a 
blue-black bruise under his eye. 

The man walked with a firm, slightly rolling gait. 

Three paces behind, his bayonet almost touching the man’s back, 
came a Petlyura soldier in a grey coat and two cartridge pouches at 
his belt. From under his shaggy sheepskin cap two small, cautious 
eyes watched the back of his captive’s head. Yellow, tobacco-stained 
moustaches bristled on either side of his face. 

Liza slackened her pace slightly and crossed over to the other side 
of the road. Just then Pavel emerged onto the highway behind her. 

As he passed the old house and turned to the right at the bend in 
the road, he too saw the two men coming toward him. 

Pavel stopped with a start and stood as if rooted to the ground. The 
arrested man was Zhukhrai. 

“So that’s why he didn’t come back!” 

Zhukhrai was coming nearer and nearer. Pavel’s heart pounded as 
if it would burst. His thoughts raced madly as his mind sought vainly 
to grasp the situation. There was not enough time for deliberation. 
Only one thing was clear: Zhukhrai was done for. 

Stunned and bewildered Pavel watched the two approach. What 
was to be done? 

At the last moment he remembered the pistol in his pocket. As 
soon as they passed him he would shoot the man with the rifle in the 
back, and Fyodor would be free. With that decision reached on the 
spur of the moment his mind cleared. After all, it was only yesterday 
that Fyodor had told him: “For that we need stout fellows...” 


113 


Pavel glanced quickly behind him. The street leading to town was 
deserted; there was not a soul in sight. Ahead a woman in a light coat 
was hurrying across the road. She would not interfere. The second 
street branching off at the intersection he could not see. Only far 
away on the road to the station some people were visible. 

Pavel moved over to the edge of the road. Zhukhrai saw him when 
they were only a few paces apart. 

Zhukhrai looked at him from the corner of his eye and his thick 
eyebrows quivered. The unexpectedness of the encounter made him 
slow down his step. The bayonet pricked him in the back. 

“Lively, there, or I’ll hurry you along with this butt!” the escort 
said in a screechy falsetto. 

Zhukhrai quickened his pace. He wanted to speak to Pavel, but 
refrained; he only waved his hand as if in greeting. 

Fearing to attract the attention of the yellow-moustached soldier, 
Pavel turned aside as Zhukhrai passed, as if completely indifferent to 
what was going on. 

But in his head drilled the anxious thought: 

“What if I miss him and the bullet hits Zhukhrai...” 

With the Petlyura man almost on him there was no time to thi nk . 

When the yellow-moustached soldier came abreast of him, Pavel 
made a sudden lunge at him and seizing hold of the rifle struck the 
barrel down. 

The bayonet hit a stone with a grating sound. 

The attack caught the soldier unawares, and for a moment he was 
dumbfounded. Then he violently jerked the rifle toward himself 
Throwing the full weight of his body on it, Pavel managed to retain 
his grip. A shot crashed out, the bullet striking a stone and ricocheting 
with a whine into the ditch. 

Hearing the shot, Zhukhrai leapt aside and spun around. The 
soldier was wrenching at the rifle fiercely in an effort to tear it out 
of Pavel’s hands. Pavel’s arms were painfully twisted, but he did not 
release his hold. Then with a sharp lunge the enraged Petlyura man 
threw Pavel down on the ground, but still he could not wrench the 


114 


rifle loose. Pavel went down, dragging the soldier down with him, 
and there was no power on earth that could have made him relinquish 
the rifle at this crucial moment. 

In two strides Zhukhrai was alongside the struggling pair. His iron 
fist described an arc in the air and descended on the soldier’s head; 
a second later the Petlyura man had been wrenched off Pavel and, 
sagging under the impact of two leaden blows in the face, his limp 
body collapsed into the wayside ditch. The same strong hands that 
had delivered those blows lifted Pavel from the ground and set him 
on his feet. 

Victor, who by this time had gone a hundred paces or so from 
the intersection, walked on whistling La donna e mobile, his spirits 
soaring after his meeting with Liza and her promise to see him at the 
abandoned factory the next day. 

Among the inveterate rakes at the Gymnasium rumour had it 
that Liza Sukharko was rather daring in her love affairs. Insolent 
and conceited Semyon Zalivanov had once actually said that Liza 
had surrendered to him, and although Victor did not quite believe 
Semyon, Liza nevertheless intrigued him. Tomorrow he would find 
out whether Zalivanov had spoken the truth or-not. 

“If she comes I’ll not hesitate. After all, she lets you kiss her. And 
if Semyon is telling the truth...” Here his thoughts were interrupted 
as he stepped aside to let two Petlyura soldiers pass. One of them was 
astride a docktailed horse, swinging a canvas bucket - evidently on 
his way to water the animal. The other, in a short jacket and loose 
blue trousers, was walking alongside, resting his hand on the rider’s 
knee and telling him a funny story. 

Victor let them pass and was about to continue on his way when a 
rifle shot on the highway made him stop in his tracks. He turned and 
he saw the mounted man spurring his horse toward the sound, while 
the other soldier ran behind, supporting his sabre with his hand. 

Victor ran after them. When he had almost reached the highway 
another shot rang out, and from around the corner came the horseman 


115 


galloping madly. He urged on the horse with his heels and the canvas 
bucket, and leaping to the ground at the first gateway shouted to the 
men in the yard: 

“To arms! They’ve killed one of our men!” 

A minute later several men dashed out of the yard, clicking the 
bolts of their rifles as they ran. 

Victor was arrested. 

Several people were now clustered on the road, among them 
Victor and Liza, who had been detained as a witness. 

Liza had been rooted to the spot from fright, and hence had a 
good view of Zhukhrai and Korchagin when they ran past; much to 
her surprise she realised that the young man who had attacked the 
Petlyura soldier was the one whom Tonya had wanted to introduce 
to her. 

The two had just vaulted over the fence into a garden when the 
horseman came galloping down the street. Noticing Zhukhrai running 
with a rifle in his hands and the stunned soldier struggling to get back 
on his feet, the rider spurred his horse toward the fence. 

Zhukhrai, however, turned around, raised the rifle and fired at the 
pursuer, who swung around and beat a hasty retreat. 

The soldier, barely able to speak through his battered lips, was 
now telling what had happened. 

“You dunderhead, what do you mean by letting a prisoner get 
away from under your nose? Now you’re in for twenty-five strokes 
on your backside.” 

“Smart, aren’t you?” the soldier snapped back angrily. “From 
under my nose, eh? How was I to know the other bastard would jump 
on me like a madman?” 

Liza too was questioned. She told the same story as the escort, 
but she omitted to say that she knew the assailant. Nevertheless they 
were all taken to the commandant’s office, and were not released 
until evening. 

The Commandant himself offered to see Liza home, but she 
refused. His breath smelled of vodka and the offer boded no good. 


116 



117 


Victor escorted Liza home. 

It was quite a distance to the station and as they walked along arm 
in arm Victor was grateful for the incident. 

“You haven’t any idea who it was that freed the prisoner?” Liza 
asked as they were approaching her home. 

“Of course not. How could I?” 

“Do you remember the evening Tonya wanted to introduce a 
certain young man to us?” 

Victor halted. 

“Pavel Korchagin?” he asked, surprised. 

“Yes, I think his name was Korchagin. Remember how he walked 
out in such a funny way? Well, it was he.” 

Victor stood dumbfounded. 

“Are you sure?” he asked Liza. 

“Yes. I remember his face perfectly.” 

“Why didn’t you tell this to the Commandant?” 

Liza was indignant. 

“Do you think I would do anything so vile?” 

“Vile? You call it vile to tell who attacked the escort?” 

“And do you consider it honourable? You seem to have forgotten 
what they’ve done. Have you any idea how many Jewish orphans 
there are at the Gymnasium, and yet you’d want me to tell them about 
Korchagin? I’m sorry, I didn’t expect that of you.” 

Leszczinski was much surprised by Liza’s reply. But since it did 
not fit in with his plans to quarrel with her, he tried to change the 
subject. 

“Don’t be angry, Liza, I was only joking. I didn’t know you were 
so upright.” 

“The joke was in very bad taste,” Liza retorted drily. 

As jhe was saying goodbye to her outside the Sukharko house, 
Victor asked: “Will you come then, Liza?” 

“I don’t know,” she replied vaguely. 

Walking back to town, Victor turned the matter over in his mind. 


118 


“Well, mademoiselle, you may think it vile, but I happen to thi nk 
differently. Of course it’s all the same to me who freed whom.” 

To him as a Leszczinski, the scion of an old Polish family, both 
sides were equally obnoxious. The only government he recognized 
was the government of the Polish gentry, the Recz Pospolita, and 
that would soon come with the Polish legions. But here was an 
opportunity to get rid of that scoundrel Korchagin. They’d twist his 
neck sure enough. 

Victor was the only member of the family to have remained in 
town. He was staying with an aunt, who was married to the assistant 
director of the sugar re-finery. His family had been living for some 
time in Warsaw, where his father Sigismund Leszczinski occupied a 
position of some importance. 

Victor walked up to the commandant’s office and turned into the 
open door. 

Shortly afterwards he was on his way to the Korchagin house 
accompanied by four Petlyura men. 

“That’s the place,” he said quietly, pointing to a lighted window. 
“May I go now?” he asked the Khorunzhy beside him. 

“Of course. We’ll manage ourselves. Thanks for the tip.” 

Victor hurried away down the sidewalk. 

The last blow in the back sent Pavel reeling into the dark room to 
which they had led him, and his outstretched arms collided with the 
opposite wall. Feeling around he found something like a bunk, and he 
sat down, bruised and aching in body and spirit. 

The arrest had come as a complete surprise. How had the Petlyura 
crowd found out about him? He was sure no one had seen him. What 
would happen next? And where was Zhukhrai? 

He had left the sailor at Klimka’s place. From there he had gone 
to Sergei, while Zhukhrai remained to wait for the evening in order 
to slip out of town. 

“Good thing I hid the revolver in the crow’s nest,” Pavel thought, 
“If they had found it, it would have been all up with me. But how did 


119 


they find out?” There was no answer to the question that tormented 
him. 

The Petlyura men had not got much out of the Korchagin house 
although they made a thorough search of its every comer. Artem had 
taken his best suit and the accordion to the village, and his mother 
had taken a tru nk with her, so that there was little left for them to 
pick up. 

The journey to the guardhouse, however, was some-thing Pavel 
would never forget. The night was pitch black, the sky overcast with 
clouds, and he had blundered along, blindly and half-dazed, propelled 
by brutal kicks from all sides. 

He could hear voices behind the door leading into the next room, 
which was occupied by the Commandant’s guard. A bright strip of 
light showed under the door. Pavel got up and feeling his way along 
the wall walked around the room. Opposite the bunk he discovered 
a window with solid sharp-pointed bars. He tried them with his hand 
- they were firmly fixed in place. The place had obviously been a 
storeroom. 

He made his way to the door and stood there for a moment 
listening. Then he pressed lightly on the handle. The door gave a 
sickening creak and Pavel swore violently under his breath. 

Through the narrow slit that opened before him he saw a pair of 
calloused feet with crooked toes sticking out over the edge of a bunk. 
Another light push against the handle and the door protested louder 
still. A disheveled figure with a sleep-swollen face now rose up in 
the bunk and fiercely scratching his lousy head with all five fingers 
burst into a long tirade. When the obscene flow of abuse ended, the 
creature reached out to the rifle standing at the head of the bunk and 
added phlegmatically: 

“Shut that door and if I catch you looking in here once more I’ll 
bash in your...” 

Pavel shut the door. There was a roar of laughter in the next 
room. 

He thought a great deal that night. His initial attempt to take a 


120 


hand in the fight had ended badly for him. The very first step had 
brought capture and now he was trapped like a mouse. 

Still sitting up, he drifted into a restless half-sleep, and the image 
of his mother with her peaked, wrinkled features and the eyes he 
loved so well rose before him. And he thought: “It’s a good thing 
she’s away - that makes it less painful.” 

A grey square of light from the window appeared on the floor. 

The darkness was gradually retreating. Dawn was approaching. 


CHAPTER SIX 


A light shone in only one window of the big old house; 
the curtains were drawn. Outside Tresor, now chained for the 
night, suddenly barked in his reverberating bass. 

Through a sleepy haze Tonya heard her mother speaking in a low 
voice. 

“No, she is not asleep yet. Come in, Liza.” 

The light footsteps of her friend and the warm, impulsive hug 
finally dispelled her drowsiness. 

Tonya smiled wanly. 

“I’m so glad you’ve come, Liza. Papa passed the crisis yesterday 
and today he has been sleeping soundly all day. Mama and I have had 
some rest too after so many sleepless nights. Tell me all the news.” 
Tonya drew her friend down beside her on the couch. 

“Oh, there’s plenty of news, but some of it’s for your ears only,” 
Liza smiled with a sly look at Yekaterina Mikhailovna. 

Tonya’s mother smiled. She was a matronly woman of thirty-six 
with the vigorous movements of a young girl, clever grey eyes and a 
face that was pleasant though not beautiful. 

“I will gladly leave you alone in a few minutes, but first I want to 


121 


hear the news that is fit for everybody’s ears,” she joked, pulling a 
chair up to the divan. 

“Well, to begin with we’ve finished with school. The board has 
decided to issue graduation certificates to the seventh-graders. I am 
glad. I’m so sick of all this algebra and geometry! What good is it 
to any one? The boys may possibly continue their studies although 
they don’t kn ow where, with all this fighting going on. It’s simply 
terrible... As for us, we’ll be married off and wives don’t need 
algebra,” Liza laughed. 

After sitting with the girls for a little while, Yekaterina Mikhailovna 
went to her own room. 

Liza now moved closer to Tonya and with her arms about her gave 
her a whispered account of the encounter at the crossroads. 

“You can imagine my surprise, Tonechka, when I realized that the 
lad who was running away was ... guess who?” 

Tonya, who was listening with interest, shrugged her shoulders. 

“Korchagin!” Liza blurted out breathlessly. 

Tonya started and winced. 

“Korchagin?” 

Liza, pleased with the impression she had made, went on to 
describe her quarrel with Victor. 

Carried away by her story, Liza did not notice Tonya’s face grow 
pale and her fingers pluck nervously at her blue blouse. Liza did not 
know how Tonya’s heart constricted with anxiety, nor did she realize 
why the long lashes framing her pretty eyes trembled so. 

Tonya paid scant heed to Liza’s story of the dru nk en Khorunzhy. 
A single thought bored into her mind: “So Victor Leszczinski kn ows 
who attacked the soldier. Oh, why did Liza tell him?” And in spite of 
herself the words broke from her lips. 

“What did you say?” Liza could not grasp her meaning at once. 

“Why did you tell Leszczinski about Pavlusha... I mean 
Korchagin? He’s sure to betray him...” 

“Oh, surely not!” Liza protested. “I don’t think he would do such 
a thing. After all, why should he?” 


122 


Tonya sat up sharply and hugged her knees so hard that it hurt. 

“You don’t understand, Liza! He and Korchagin are enemies, and 
besides there is something else... You made a big mistake when you 
told Victor about Pavlusha.” 

Only now did Liza notice Tonya’s agitation, and her inadvertant 
use of Korchagin’s first name opened Liza’s eyes to something she 
had but vaguely guessed at. 

She could not help feeling guilty and lapsed into an embarrassed 
silence. 

“So it’s true,” she thought. “Fancy Tonya falling in love with an 
...a plain workman.” Liza wanted to talk about it very much, but out 
of consideration for her friend she refrained. Anxious to atone for her 
guilt in some way, she gripped Tonya’s hands. 

“Are you very worried, Tonya?” 

“No, perhaps Victor is more honourable than I think,” Tonya 
replied absently. 

The awkward silence that ensued was broken by the arrival of a 
schoolmate of theirs, a bashful, gawky lad named Demianov. 

After seeing her friends off, Tonya stood for a long time leaning 
against the wicket gate and staring at the dark strip of road leading 
to town. That eternal vagrant, the wind, laden with a chill dampness 
and the dank odour of the wet spring soil fanned her face. Dull red 
lights blinked in the windows of the houses over in the town. There it 
was, that town that lived a life apart from hers, and somewhere there, 
under one of those roofs, unaware of the danger that threatened him, 
was her rebellious friend Pavel. Perhaps he had forgotten her - how 
many days had flown by since their last meeting? He had been in 
the wrong that time, but all that had long been forgotten. Tomorrow 
she would see him and their friendship would be restored, a moving, 
warming friendship. It was sure to return - of that Tonya had not the 
slightest doubt. If only the night did not betray him, the night that 
seemed to harbour evil, as if lying in, wait for him... It was chilly, and 
after a last look at the road, Tonya went in. The thought, “If only the 


123 


night does not betray him,” still drilled in her head as she dozed off 
wrapped up in the blankets of her bed. 

Tonya woke up early in the morning before anyone else was about, 
and dressed quickly. She slipped out of the house quietly so as not to 
wake up the family, untied the big shaggy Tresor and set out for town 
with the dog. She hesitated for a moment in front of the Korchagin 
house, then pushed the gate open and walked into the yard. Tresor 
dashed ahead wagging his tail... 

Artem had returned from the village early that same morning. The 
blacksmith he had worked for had given him a lift into town on his 
cart. On reaching home he threw the sack of flour he had earned on 
his shoulders and walked into the yard, followed by the blacksmith 
carrying the rest of his belongings. Outside the open door Artem set 
the sack down on the ground and called out: 

“Pavka!” 

There was no answer. 

“What’s the hitch there? Why not go right in?” said the smith as 
he came up. 

Setting his belongings down in the kitchen, Artem went into the 
next room. The sight that met his eyes there dumbfounded him: the 
place was turned upside down and old clothes littered the floor. 

“What the devil is this?” Artem muttered completely at a loss. 

“It’s a mess all right,” agreed the blacksmith. 

“Where’s the boy gone to?” Artem was getting angry. But the 
place was deserted and there was no one about to supply an answer. 

The blacksmith said goodbye and left. 

Artem went into the yard and looked around. 

“I can’t make head or tail of this! All the doors wide open and no 
Pavka.” 

Then he heard footsteps behind him. Turning around he saw a 
huge dog with ears pricked standing before him. A girl was walking 
toward the house from the gate. 

“I must see Pavel Korchagin,” she said in a low voice, surveying 
Artem. 


124 


“I’ve got to see him too. But the devil knows where he’s gone. 
When I got here the house was unlocked and no Pavka anywhere 
about. So you’re looking for him too?” he addressed the girl. 

The girl answered with a question: “Are you Korchagin’s brother 
Artem?” 

“I am. Why?” 

Instead of replying, the girl stared in alarm at the open door. “Why 
didn’t I come last night?” she thought. “It can’t be, it can’t be. .. .” 
And her heart grew heavier still. 

“You found the door open and Pavel gone?” she asked Artem, who 
was staring at her in surprise. 

“And what would you be wanting of Pavel may I ask?” 

Tonya came closer to him and casting a look around spoke 
jerkily: 

“I don’t know for sure, but if Pavel isn’t at home he must have 
been arrested.” 

Artem started nervously. “Arrested. What for?” 

“Let’s go inside,” Tonya said. 

Artem listened in silence while Tonya told him all she knew. By 
the time she had finished he was despairing. 

“Damn it all! As if there wasn’t enough trouble without this mess,” 
he muttered gloomily. “Now I see why the place was turned upside 
down. What the hell did the boy have to get mixed up in this business 
for.... Where can I find him now? And who may you be, miss?” 

“My father is forest warden Tumanov. I’m a friend of Pavel’s.” 

“I see,” Artem drawled out vaguely. “Here I was bringing flour to 
feed the boy up, and now this....” 

Tonya and Artem looked at each other in silence. 

“I must go now,” Tonya said softly as she prepared to go. “Perhaps 
you’ll be able to find him. I’ll come back in the evening to hear what 
you have learned.” 

Artem gave her a silent nod. 

A lean fly just awakened from its winter sleep buzzed in a corner 
of the window. On the edge of an old threadbare couch sat a young 


125 


peasant woman, her elbows resting on her knees and her eyes fixed 
blankly on the filthy floor. 

The Commandant, chewing a cigarette stuck in the comer of 
his mouth, finished writing on a sheet of paper with a flourish, and, 
obviously pleased with himself, added an ornate signature ending 
in a curlicue under the title “Commandant of the town of She- 
petovka, Khorunzhy.” From the door came the clinking of spurs. The 
Commandant looked up. 

Before him stood Salomyga with a bandaged arm. 

“Hullo, what’s blown you in?” the Commandant greeted him. 

“Not a good wind, at any rate. Got my hand sliced to the bone by 
a Bogunets 

Ignoring the woman’s presence Salomyga cursed violently. 

“So what are you doing here? Convalescing?” 

“We’ll have time to convalesce in the next world. They’re pressing 
down pretty hard on us at the front.” 

The Commandant interrupted him, nodding toward the woman. 

“We’ll talk about that later.” 

Salomyga sat down heavily on a stool and removed his cap, which 
bore a cockade with an enamel trident, the emblem of the UNR 
(Ukrainian National Republic). 

“Golub sent me,” he began in a low tone. “A division of regulars 
is going to be transferred here soon. In general there’s going to be 
some doings in town, and it’s my job to put things straight. The Chief 
himself may come here with some foreign bigwig or other, so there’s 
to be no talk about any ‘diversions.’ What’re you writing?” 

The Commandant shifted the cigarette to the other corner of his 
mouth. 

“I’ve got a damn nuisance of a boy here. Remember that chap 
Zhukhrai, the one who stirred up the rail-waymen against us? Well, 
he was caught at the station.” 

* Bogunets - a fighting man of the Bogun Regiment of the Red Army, thus named 
after the hero of the national-liberation struggle waged by the Ukrainian people in 
the 17th century. 


126 


“He was, eh? Go on,” Salomyga pulled his stool closer, highly 
interested. 

“Well, that blockhead Omelchenko, the Station Commandant, 
sent him over escorted by a Cossack, and on the way the lad I’ve 
got in here took the prisoner away from him in broad daylight. The 
Cossack was disarmed and got his teeth knocked out, and was left to 
whistle for his prisoner. Zhukhrai got away, but we managed to grab 
this fellow. Here you have it all down on paper,” and he pushed a 
sheaf of sheets covered with writing toward Salomyga. 

The latter scanned through the report, turning, over the sheets with 
his left hand. 

When he had finished, he looked at the Commandant. 

“And so you got nothing out of him?” 

The Commandant pulled nervously at the peak of his cap. 

“I’ve been at him for five days now, but all he says is, ‘I don’t 
know anything and I didn’t free him.’ The young scoundrel! You see, 
the escort recognized him - practically choked the life out of him as 
soon as he saw him. I could hardly pull the Cossack off - the fellow 
had good reason to be sore because Omelchenko at the station had 
given him twenty-five strokes with the cleaning rod for losing his 
prisoner. There’s no sense in keeping him any more so I’m sending 
this off to headquarters for permission to finish him off.” 

Salomyga spat in disdain. 

“If I had him he’d speak up sure enough. You’re not much at 
conducting enquiries. Whoever heard of a theology student making a 
Commandant! Did you try the rod?” 

The Commandant was furious. 

“You’re going a bit too far. Keep your sneers to yourself. I’m the 
Commandant here and I’ll ask you not to interfere.” 

Salomyga looked at the bristling Commandant and roared with 
laughter. 

“Ha-ha-ha... Don’t puff yourself up too much, priest’s son, or 
you’ll burst. To hell with you and your problems. Better tell me 
where a fellow can get a couple of bottles of samogonT 


127 


The Commandant grinned. 

“Can be done.” 

“As far as this is concerned,” Salomyga jabbed at the sheaf of 
papers with his finger, “if you want to fix him properly put him down 
as eighteen years instead of sixteen. Round the top of the six off like 
that. Otherwise they mightn’t pass it.” 

There were three of them in the storeroom. A bearded old man in a 
threadbare coat lay on his side on the bunk, his spindle legs, encased 
in wide linen trousers, drawn up under him. He had been arrested 
because the horse of the Petlyura men billeted with him had been 
missing from the shed. An elderly woman with small shifty eyes and 
a pointed chin was sitting on the floor. She made her living by selling 
samogon and had been thrown in here on a charge of stealing a watch 
and other valuables. Korchagin lay semiconscious in the corner under 
the window, his head resting on his crushed cap. 

A young woman, wearing a coloured kerchief, her eyes dilated 
with terror, was led into the store-room. 

She stood for a moment or two and then sat down next to the 
samogon woman. 

“Got caught, eh, wench?” the latter spoke rapidly, inspecting the 
newcomer with curious eyes. 

There was no answer, but the samogon woman would not give 
up. 

“Why’d they pick you up, eh? Nothing to do with samogon by any 
chance?” 

The peasant girl got up and looked at the persistent hag. 

“No, it’s because of my brother,” she replied quietly. 

“And who’s he?” the old woman persisted. 

The old man spoke up. 

“Why don’t you leave her alone? She’s probably got enough to 
worry about without your chattering away.” 

The woman turned quickly toward the bunk. 


128 


“Who are you to tell me what to do? I’m not talking to you, 
am I?” 

The old man spat. 

“Leave her alone, I tell you.” 

Silence descended again on the storeroom. The peasant girl spread 
out a big shawl and lay down, resting her head on her arm. 

The samogon woman began to eat. The old man sat up, setting his 
feet on the floor, slowly rolled himself a cigarette and lit it. Clouds of 
acrid smoke spread out. 

“Aperson can’t eat in peace with that stink,” the woman grumbled, 
her jaws working busily. “You’ve smoked the whole place up.” 

The old man returned with a sneer: 

“Afraid of losing weight, eh? You won’t be able to get through the 
door soon. Why don’t you give the boy something to eat instead of 
stuffing it all into yourself.” 

The woman made an angry gesture. 

“I tried, but he doesn’t want anything. And as for that you can 
keep your mouth shut - it’s not your food I’m eating.” 

The girl turned to the samogon woman and, nodding toward 
Korchagin, asked: 

“Do you know why he’s in here?” 

The woman brightened up at being addressed and readily replied. 

“He’s a local lad - Korchagina’s younger boy. His mother’s a 
cook.” 

Leaning over to the girl, she whispered in her ear: “He freed a 
Bolshevik - a sailor we had hereabouts who used to lodge with my 
neighbour Zozulikha.” 

The young woman remembered the words she had overheard: 
“I’m sending this off to headquarters for permission to finish him 
off.” 

One after the other troop trains pulled in at the junction, and 
battalions of regulars poured out in a disorderly mob. The armoured 
train Zaporozheis, four cars long, its steel sides ribbed with rivets, 


129 


crawled along a side track. Guns were unloaded from flatcars and 
horses were led out of closed freight cars. The horses were saddled 
on the spot and mounted men jostled their way through the milling 
crowds of infantrymen to the station yard where the cavalry unit was 
lining up. 

Officers ran up and down, calling the numbers of their units. 

The station buzzed like a wasps’ nest. Gradually the regular 
squares of platoons were hammered out of the shapeless mass of 
vociferous, swirling humanity and soon a stream of armed men was 
pouring into town. Until late in the evening carts creaked and rattled 
and the stragglers bringing up the rear of the rifle division trailed 
along the highway. 

The procession finally ended with the headquarters company 
marching briskly by, bellowing the while from a hundred and twenty 
throats: 

What’s this hue, what’s this cry 
All about? 

’Tis Petlyura and his boys, 

Without doubt... 

Pavel Korchagin got up to look out of the window. Through the 
early twilight he could hear the rumbling of wheels on the street, the 
tramping of many feet, and a multitude of voices raised in song. 

From behind him came a soft voice. 

“The troops have come to town.” 

Korchagin turned round. 

The speaker was the girl who had been brought in the day before. 

He had already heard her story - the samogon woman had wormed 
it out of her. She came from a village seven versts from the town, 
where her elder brother, Gritsko, now a Red partisan, had headed a 
poor peasants’ committee when the Soviets were in power. 

When the Reds left, Gritsko girded himself with a machine- 
gun belt and went with them. Now the family was being hounded 


130 


incessantly. Their only horse had been taken away from them. The 
father had been imprisoned for a while and had a rough time of it. 
The village elder - one of those on whom Gritsko had clamped down 
- was always billeting strangers in their house, out of sheer spite. The 
family was completely ruined. And when the Commandant had come 
to the village the day before to make a search, the elder had brought 
him to the girl’s place. She struck his fancy and the next morning he 
brought her to town with him “for interrogation.” 

Korchagin could not fall asleep, try as he might he could not find 
rest, and in his brain drilled one insistent thought which he could not 
dispel: “What next?” 

His bruised body ached painfully, for the escort had beaten him 
with bestial fury. 

To escape the hateful thoughts crowding his mind he listened to 
the whispering of the two women. 

In a barely audible voice the girl was telling how the Commandant 
had badgered her, threatening and coaxing, and when she rebuffed 
him, turning on her in fury. “I’ll lock you up in a cellar where you 
can’t get away from me,” he had said. 

Darkness lurked in the comers of the cell. There was another night 
ahead, a stifling, restless night. It was the seventh night in captivity, 
but it seemed to Pavel that he had been there for months. The floor 
was hard, and pain racked his body. There were three of them now 
in the storeroom. The samogon woman had been released by the 
Khorunzhy to procure some vodka. Grandpa was snoring on the bunk 
as if he were at home on his Russian stove; he bore his misfortune, 
with stoic calm and slept soundly through the night. Khristina and 
Pavel lay on the floor, almost side by side. Yesterday Pavel had seen 
Sergei through the window - he had stood for a long time out in the 
street, looking sadly at the windows of the houses. 

“He kn ows I’m here,” Pavel had thought. 

For three days running someone had brought sour black bread for 
him - who it was the guards would not tell. And for two days the 
Commandant had repeatedly questioned him. 


131 


What could it all mean? 

During the questioning he had given nothing away; on the 
contrary he had denied everything. Why he had kept silent, he did 
not know himself. He wanted to be brave and strong, like those of 
whom he had read in books, yet that night when he was being taken 
to prison and one of his captors had said, “What’s the use of dragging 
him along, Pan Khorunzhy? A bullet in the back will fix him,” he had 
been afraid. Yes, the thought of dying at sixteen was terrifying! To die 
meant not to be alive any more. 

Khristina was also thinking. She knew more than the young man. 
Most likely he did not know yet what was in store for him ... what she 
had overheard. 

He tossed about restlessly at night unable to sleep. Khristina pitied 
him, oh, how she pitied him, though her own plight weighed down 
heavily upon her - it was impossible to forget the menace of the 
Commandant’s words: “I’ll fix you up tomorrow - if you won’t have 
me it’s the guardhouse for you. The Cossacks won’t let you off. So 
take your choice.” 

Oh how hard it was, and no mercy to be expected anywhere! Was 
it her fault that Gritsko had joined the Reds? How cruel life was! 

A dull pain choked her and in the agony of helpless despair and 
fear her body was racked by soundless sobs. 

A shadow moved in the corner by the wall. 

“Why are you crying?” 

In a passionate whisper Khristina poured out her woes to her silent 
cell mate. He did not speak, but laid his hand lightly on hers. 

“They’ll torture me to death, curse them ,” she whispered in terror, 
gulping down her tears. “Nothing can save me.” 

What could Pavel say to this girl? There was nothing to say. Life 
was crushing them both in an iron ring. 

Perhaps he ought to put up a fight when they came for her 
tomorrow? They’d only beat him to death, or a sabre blow on the 
head would end it all. Wishing to comfort somehow the distraught 
girl, he stroked her hand tenderly. The sobbing ceased. At intervals 


132 


the sentry at the entrance could be heard challenging a passer-by with 
the usual “Who goes there?” and then everything was quiet again. 
Grandpa was fast asleep. The interminable minutes crawled slowly 
by. Then, to his utter surprise, Pavel felt the girl’s arms go around him 
and pull him toward her. 

“Listen,” hot lips were whispering, “there is no escape for me: if it 
isn’t the officer, it’ll be those others. Take me, love, so that dog won’t 
be the first to have me.” 

“What are you saying, Khristina!” 

But the strong arms did not release him. Full, burning lips pressed 
down on his - they were hard to escape. The girl’s words were 
simple, tender - and he knew why she uttered them . 

Then he was oblivious to his surroundings. The lock on the door, 
the red-headed Cossack, the Commandant, the brutal beatings, the 
seven stifling, sleepless nights - all were forgotten, and for a moment 
there existed only the burning lips and the face moist with tears. 

Suddenly he remembered Tonya. 

How could he forget her? Those dear, wonderful eyes. 

He mustered his strength and broke away from Khristina’s 
embrace. He staggered to his feet like a dru nk en man and seized hold 
of the grill. Kh ristina’s hands found him. 

“Why, what is the matter?” 

All her heart was in that question! He bent down to her and 
pressing her hands said: 

“I can’t, Kh ristina. You are so ... good.” He did not know himself 
what he said besides. 

He straightened up again to break the intolerable silence and went 
over to the bunk. Sitting down on the edge he woke up the old man. 

“Give me a smoke, please, Granddad.” 

The girl, huddled in her shawl, wept in the corner. 

The next day the Commandant came with some Cossacks and 
took Kh ristina away. Her eyes sought Pavel’s in farewell, and there 
was reproach in them. And when the door slammed behind her his 
soul was more desolate and dreary than ever. 


133 


All day long Granddad could not get a word out of Pavel. 
The sentries and the commandant’s guard were changed. Toward 
evening a new prisoner was brought in. Pavel recognized him: it was 
Dolinnik, a carpenter from the sugar refinery. He was a solidly built 
man of squat build wearing a faded yellow shirt under a threadbare 
jacket. He surveyed the storeroom with a keen eye. 

Pavel had seen him in 1917, in February, when the reverberations 
of the revolution reached their town. He had heard only one Bolshevik 
speak during the noisy demonstrations held then and that Bolshevik 
was Dolinnik. He had climbed onto a roadside fence and addressed 
the troops. Pavel remembered his closing words: 

“Follow the Bolsheviks, soldiers, they will not betray you!” 

He had not seen the carpenter since. 

Granddad was glad to have a new cell mate, for he obviously 
found it hard to sit silent all day long. Dolinnik settled down next 
to him on the edge of the bunk, smoked a cigarette with him and 
questioned him about everything. 

Then the newcomer moved over to Korchagin. 

“Well, young man?” he asked Pavel. “And how did you get in 
here?” 

Pavel replied in monosyllables and Dolinnik saw that it was 
suspicion that made the young man so sparing of words. When the 
carpenter learned of the charge laid against Pavel his intelligent eyes 
widened with amazement and he sat down next to the lad. 

“So you say you got Zhukhrai away? That’s interesting. I didn’t 
know they’d nabbed you.” 

Pavel, taken by surprise, raised himself on his elbow. 

“I don’t know any Zhukhrai. They can pin anything on you 
here.” 

Dolinnik, smiling, moved closer to him. 

“That’s all right, my boy. You don’t need to be cautious with me. 
I kn ow more than you do.” 

Quietly, so that the old man should not overhear, he continued: 


134 


“I saw Zhukhrai off myself, he’s probably reached his destination 
by now. Fyodor told me all about what happened.” 

After thinking for a moment in silence, Dolinnik added: 

“I see you’re made of the right stuff, boy. Though the fact that they 
caught you and know everything is bad, very bad, I should say.” 

He took off his jacket and spreading it on the floor, sat down on it 
with his back against the wall, and began to roll another cigarette. 

Dolinnik’s last remark made everything clear to Pavel. There was 
no doubt about it that Dolinnik was all right. He had seen Zhukhrai 
off, and that meant.... 

That evening he learned that Dolinnik had been arrested for 
agitation among Petlyura’s Cossacks. Moreover, he had been caught 
distributing an appeal issued by the gubernia revolutionary committee 
calling on the troops to surrender and go over to the Reds. 

Dolinnik was careful not to tell Pavel much. 

“Who knows,” he thought to himself, “they may use the ramrod 
on the boy. He’s still too young.” 

Late at night when they were settling themselves for sleep, he 
voiced his apprehensions in the brief remark: 

“Well, Korchagin, we seem to be in a pretty bad fix. Let’s see 
what’s going to come out of it.” 

The next day a new prisoner was brought in - the flop-eared, 
scraggy-necked barber Shiyoma Zeitser whom everybody in town 
knew. 

“Fuchs, Bluvstein and Trachtenberg are going to welcome him 
with bread and salt,” he was telling Dolinnik with much spirit and 
gesticulation. “I said that if they want to do that, they can, but will 
the rest of the Jewish population back them up? No they won’t, you 
can take it from me. Of course they have their own fish to fry. Fuchs 
has a store and Trachtenberg’s got the flour mill. But what’ve I got? 
And the rest of the hungry lot? Nothing - paupers, that’s what we 
are. Well, I’ve got a loose tongue, and today when I was shaving an 
officer - one of the new ones who came recently - I said: ‘Do you 
think Ataman Petlyura knows about these pogroms or not? Will he 


135 


see the delegation?’ Oi, how many times I’ve got into trouble through 
this tongue of mine. So what do you thi nk this officer did when I had 
shaved him and powdered his face and done all in fine style too? He 
gets up and instead of paying me arrests me for agitating against the 
authorities.” Zeitser struck his chest with his fist. “Now what sort of 
agitation was that? What did I say? I only asked the fellow... And to 
lock me up for that...” 

In his excitement Zeitser twisted a button on Dolinnik’s shirt and 
tugged at his arms. 

Dolinnik smiled in spite of himself as he listened to the indignant 
Shiyoma. 

“Yes, Shiyoma,” he said gravely when the barber had finished, 
“that was a stupid thing for a clever fellow like you to do. You chose 
the wrong time to let your tongue run away with you. I wouldn’t have 
advised you to get in here.” 

Zeitser nodded understanding^ and made a gesture of despair 
with his hand. Just then the door opened and the samogon woman 
was pushed in. She staggered in, heaping foul curses on the Cossack 
who brought her. 

“You and your Commandant ought to be roasted on a slow fire! I 
hope he shrivels up and croaks from that booze of mine!” 

The guard slammed the door shut and they heard him locking it 
on the outside. 

As the woman settled down on the edge of the bunk the old man 
addressed her good-humouredly. 

“So, you’re back with us again, you old chatter-box? Sit down and 
make yourself at home.” 

The samogon woman darted a hostile glance at him and picking 
up her bundle sat down on the floor next to Dolinnik. 

It turned out that she had been released just long enough for her 
captors to get some bottles of samogon out of her. 

Suddenly shouts and the sound of running feet could be heard 
from the guardroom next door. Somebody was barking out orders. 
The prisoners stopped talking to listen. 


136 


Strange things were happening on the commons in front of the 
ungainly church with the ancient belfry. 

On three sides the square was lined with rectangles of troops 
- units of the division of regular infantry mustered in full battle kit. 

In front, facing the entrance to the church stood three regiments 
of infantry in squares placed in checkerboard fashion, their ranks 
buttressed against the school fence. 

This grey, rather dirty mass of Petlyura soldiers standing there 
with rifles at rest, wearing absurd Russian helmets like pumpkins cut 
in half, and heavily laden down with bandoliers, was the best division 
the “Directory” had. 

Well-uniformed and shod from the stores of the former tsarist 
army and consisting mainly of kulaks who were consciously fighting 
the Soviets, the division had been transferred here to defend this 
strategically important railway junction. The shining steel ribbons 
of railway tracks ran in five different directions from Shepetovka, 
and for Petlyura the loss of the junction would have meant the end 
of everything. As it was, the “Directory” had very little territory 
left in its hands, and the small town of Vinnitsa was now Petlyura’s 
capital. 

The “Chief Ataman” himself had decided to inspect the troops and 
now everything was in readiness for his arrival. 

Back in a far comer of the square where they were least likely to 
be seen stood a regiment of new recruits - barefoot youths in shabby 
civilian clothes of all descriptions. These were fann lads picked up 
from their beds by midnight raiding parties or seized on the streets 
and none of them had the least intention of doing any fighting. 

“We’re not crazy,” they said among themselves. 

The most the Petlyura officers could do was to bring the recruits 
to town under escort, divide them into companies and battalions and 
issue them arms. The very next day, however, a third of the recruits 
thus herded together would disappear and with each passing day their 
numbers dwindled. 

It would have been more than foolhardy to issue them boots, 


137 


particularly since the boot stocks were far from plentiful. Nevertheless 
an order was issued for everyone to report for conscription shod. The 
result was an astonishing collection of dilapidated footwear tied on 
with bits of string and wire. 

They were marched out for parade barefoot. 

Behind the infantry stood Golub’s cavalry regiment. 

Mounted men held back the dense crowds of curious townsfolk 
who had come to see the parade. 

After all, the “Chief Ataman” himself was to be present! Events 
like this were rare enough in town and no one wanted to miss the free 
entertainment it promised. 

On the church steps gathered the colonels and captains, the 
priest’s two daughters, a handful of Ukrainian teachers, a group of 
“free Cossacks,” and the slightly hunchbacked mayor - in a word, 
the elite representing the “public,” and among them the Inspector- 
General of Infantry wearing a Caucasian cherkesska. It was he who 
was in command of the parade. 

Inside the church Vasili the priest was garbing himself in his 
Easter service vestments. 

Petlyura was to be received in grand style. For one thing, the 
newly mobilised recruits were to take the oath of allegiance, and for 
this purpose a yellow-and-blue flag had been brought out. 

The Division Commander set out for the station in a rickety old 
Ford car to meet Petlyura. 

When he had gone, the Inspector of Infantry called over 
Colonel Chernyak, a tall, well-built officer with a foppishly twirled 
moustache. 

“Take someone along with you and see that the commandant’s 
office and the rear services are in proper shape. If you find any 
prisoners there look them over and get rid of the riffraff.” 

Chernyak clicked his heels, took along the first Cossack captain 
his eye lighted on and galloped off. 

The Inspector turned politely to the priest’s elder daughter. 

“What about the banquet, everything in order?” 


138 


“Oh yes, the Commandant’s doing his best,” she replied, gazing 
avidly at the handsome Inspector, Suddenly a stir passed through the 
crowd: a rider was coming down the road at a mad gallop, bending 
low over the neck of his horse. He waved his hand and shouted: 

“They’re coming!” 

“Fall in!” barked the Inspector. 

The officers ran to their places. 

As the Ford chugged up to the church the band struck up The 
Ukraine Lives On, 

Following the Division Commander, the “Chief Ataman” heaved 
himself laboriously out of the car. Petlyura was a man of medium 
height, with an angular head firmly planted on a red bull neck; he 
wore a blue tunic of fine wool cloth girded tight with a yellow belt 
to which a small Browning in a chamois holster was attached. On 
his head was a peaked khaki uniform cap with a cockade bearing the 
enamel trident. 

There was nothing especially warlike about the figure of Simon 
Petlyura. As a matter of fact, he did not look like a military man at 
all. 

He heard out the Inspector’s report with an expression of 
displeasure on his face. Then the mayor addressed him in greeting. 

Petlyura listened absently, staring at the assembled regiments, 
over the mayor’s head. 

“Let us begin,” he nodded to the Inspector. 

Mounting the small platform next to the flag, Petlyura delivered a 
ten-minute speech to the troops. 

The speech was unconvincing. Petlyura, evidently tired from the 
road, spoke without enthusiasm. He finished to the accompaniment 
of the regulation shouts of “Slava! Slava F' from the soldiers and 
climbed down from the platform dabbing his perspiring fore-head 
with a handkerchief. Then, together with the Inspector and the 
Division Commander, he inspected the units. 

As he passed the ra nk s of the newly mobilised recruits his eyes 
narrowed in a disdainful scowl and he bit his lips in annoyance. 


139 


Toward the end of the inspection, when the new recruits platoon 
by platoon marched in uneven ranks to the flag, where the priest 
Vasili was standing Bible in hand, and kissed first the Bible and then 
the hem of the flag, an unforeseen incident occurred. 

A delegation which had contrived by some u nkn own means to 
reach the square approached Petlyura. At the head of the group came 
the wealthy timber merchant Bluvstein with an offering of bread 
and salt, followed by Fuchs, the draper, and three other respectable 
businessmen. 

With a servile bow Bluvstein extended the tray to Petlyura. It was 
taken by an officer standing along-side. 

“The Jewish population wishes to express its sincere gratitude and 
respect for you, the head of the state. Please accept this address of 
greeting.” 

“Good,” muttered Petlyura, quickly scanning the sheet of paper. 

Fuchs stepped forward. 

“We most humbly beg you to allow us to open our enterprises and 
we ask for protection against pogroms.” Fuchs stumbled over the last 
word. 

An angry scowl darkened Petlyura’s features. 

“My army does not engage in pogroms. You had better remember 
that.” 

Fuchs spread out his arms in a gesture of resignation. 

Petlyura’s shoulder twitched nervously. The untimely appearance 
of the delegation irritated him. He turned to Golub, who was standing 
behind chewing his black moustache. 

“Here’s a complaint against your Cossacks, Pan Colonel. 
Investigate the matter and take measures accordingly,” said Petlyura. 
Then, addressing the Inspector, he said drily: 

“You may begin the parade.” 

The ill-starred delegation had not expected to run up against 
Golub and they now hastened to withdraw. 

The attention of the spectators was now wholly absorbed by the 


140 


preparations for the ceremonial march-past. Sharp commands were 
rapped out. 

Golub, his features outwardly calm, walked over to Bluvstein and 
said in a loud whisper: “Get out of here, you heathen souls, or I’ll 
make mincemeat out of you!” 

The band struck up and the first units marched through the square. 
As they drew alongside Petlyura, the troops bellowed a mechanical 
“Slava” and then swung down the highway to disappear into the side- 
streets. At the head of the companies uniformed in brand-new khaki 
outfits the officers marched at an easy gait as if they were simply 
taking a stroll, swinging their swagger sticks. The swagger stick 
mode, like cleaning rods for the soldiers, had just been introduced in 
the division. 

The new recruits brought up the rear of the parade. They came in 
a disorderly mass, out of step and jostling one another. 

There was a low rustle of bare feet as the mobilised men shuffled 
by, prodded on by the officers who worked hard but in vain to bring 
about some semblance of order. When the second company was 
passing a peasant lad in a linen shirt on the side nearest the reviewing 
stand gaped in such wide-eyed amazement at the “Chief’ that he 
stepped into a hole in the road and fell flat on the ground. His rifle 
slid over the cobble-stones with a loud clatter. He tried to get up but 
was knocked down again by the men behind him. 

Some of the spectators burst out laughing. The company broke 
ranks and passed through the square in complete disorder. The 
luckless lad picked up his rifle and ran after the others. 

Petlyura turned away from this sorry spectacle and walked over to 
the car without waiting for the end of the review. The Inspector, who 
followed him, asked diffidently: 

“Pan the Ataman will not stay for dinner?” 

“No,” Petlyura flung back curtly. 

Sergei Bruzzhak, Valya and Klimka were watching the parade in 
the crowd of spectators pressed against the high fence surrounding 


141 


the church. Sergei, gripping the bars of the grill, looked at the faces 
of the people below him with hatred in his eyes. 

“Let’s go, Valya, they’ve shut up shop,” he said in a deliberately 
loud defiant voice, and turned away from the fence. People stared at 
him in astonishment. 

Ignoring everyone, he walked to the gate, followed by his sister 
and Klimka. 

Colonel Chernyak and the Captain galloped up to the commandant’s 
office and dismounted. Leaving the horses in the charge of a dispatch 
rider they strode rapidly into the guardhouse. 

“Where’s the Commandant?” Chernyak asked the dispatch rider 
sharply. 

“Dunno,” the man stammered. “Gone off somewhere,” 

Chernyak looked around the filthy, untidy room, the unmade beds 
and the Cossacks of the commandant’s guard who sprawled on them 
and made no attempt to rise when the officers entered. 

“What sort of a pigsty is this?” Chernyak roared. “And who gave 
you permission to wallow about like hogs?” he lashed at the men 
lying flat on their backs. 

One of the Cossacks sat up, belched and growled: 

“What’re you squawking for? We’ve got our own squawker 
here.” 

“What!” Chernyak leapt toward the man. “Who do you thi nk 
you’re talking to, you bastard? I’m Colonel Chernyak. D’you hear, 
you swine! Up, all of you, or I’ll have you flogged!” The enraged 
Colonel dashed about the guardhouse. “I’ll give you one minute to 
sweep out the filth, straighten out the bedding and make your filthy 
mugs presentable. You look like a band of brigands, not Cossacks!” 

Beside himself with rage, the Colonel violently kicked at a slop 
pail obstructing his path. 

The Captain was no less violent, and, adding emphasis to his 
curses by wielding his three-thonged whip, drove the men out of 
their bunks. 


142 


“The Chief Ataman’s reviewing the parade. He’s liable to drop in 
here any minute. Get a move on there!” 

Seeing that things were taking a serious turn and that they really 
might be in for a flogging - they knew Chernyak’s reputation well 
enough - the Cossacks sprang into feverish activity. 

In no time work was in full swing. 

“We ought to have a look at the prisoners,” the Captain suggested. 
“There’s no telling whom they’ve got locked up here. Might be 
trouble if the Chief looks in.” 

“Who has the key?” Chernyak asked the sentry. “Open the door 
at once.” 

A Sergeant jumped up and opened the lock. 

“Where’s the Commandant? How long do you think I’m going 
to wait for him? Find him at once and send him in here,” Chernyak 
ordered. “Muster the guard in the yard! Why are the rifles without 
bayonets?” 

“We only took over yesterday,” the Sergeant tried to explain, and 
hurried off in search of the Commandant. 

The Captain kicked the storeroom door open. Several of the people 
inside got up from the floor, the others remained motionless. 

“Open the door wider,” Chernyak commanded. “Not enough light 
here.” 

He scrutinized the prisoners’ faces. 

“What are you in for?” he snapped at the old man sitting on the 
edge of the bunk. 

The old man half rose, hitched up his trousers and, frightened by 
the sharp order, mumbled: 

“Dunno myself. They just locked me up and here I am. There was 
a horse disappeared from the yard, but I’ve got nothing to do with 
it.” 

“Whose horse?” the Captain interrupted him. 

“An army horse, of course. My billets sold him and drank the 
proceeds and now they’re blaming me.” 

Chernyak ran his eye swiftly over the old man and with an 


143 


impatient jerk of his shoulder shouted: “Pick up your things and get 
out of here!” Then he turned to the samogon woman. 

The old man could not believe his ears. Blinking his shortsighted 
eyes, he turned to the Captain: 

“Does that mean I can go?” 

The Cossack nodded as much as to say: the faster you get out the 
better. 

Hurriedly the old man seized his bundle which hung over the edge 
of the bunk and dashed through the door. 

“And what are you in for?” Chernyak was questioning the 
samogon woman. 

Swallowing the mouthful of pie she had been chewing, the woman 
rattled off a ready answer: 

“It’s an injustice it is that I should be in here, Pan Chief. Just iink 
of it, to drink a poor thwidow’s samogon and then lock her up.” 

“You’re not in the samogon business, are you?” Chernyak asked. 

“Business? Nothing of the kind,” said the woman with an injured 
air. “The Commandant came and took four bottles and didn’t pay a 
kopek. That’s how it is: they drink your booze and never pay. You 
wouldn’t call that business, would you?” 

“Enough. Now go to the devil!” 

The woman did not wait for the order to be repeated. She picked 
up her basket and backed to the door, bowing in gratitude. 

“May God bless you with good health, your honours.” 

Dolinnik watched the comedy with wide-open eyes. None of the 
prisoners could make out what it was all about. The only thing that 
was clear was that the arrivals were chiefs of some kind who had the 
power to dispose of them as they saw fit. 

“And you there?” Chernyak spoke to Dolinnik. 

“Stand up when Pan the Colonel speaks to you!” barked the 
Captain. 

Slowly Dolinnik raised himself to his feet from the floor. 

“What are you in for?” Chernyak repeated. 

For a few seconds Dolinnik’s eyes rested on the Colonel’s neatly 


144 


twirled moustache and his clean-shaven face, then on the peak of his 
new cap with the enamel cockade and a wild thought flashed through 
his mind: Maybe it’ll work! 

“I was arrested for being out on the streets after eight o’clock,” he 
said the first thing that came into his head. 

He awaited the answer in an agony of suspense. 

“What were you doing out at night?” 

“It wasn’t night, only about eleven o’clock.” 

As he spoke he no longer believed that this shot in the dark would 
succeed. 

His knees trembled when he heard the brief command: 

“Get out.” 

Dolinnik walked hurriedly out of the door, forgetting his jacket; 
the Captain was already questioning the next prisoner. 

Korchagin was the last to be interrogated. He sat on the floor 
completely dumbfounded by the proceedings. At first he could not 
believe that Dolinnik had been released. Why were they letting 
everyone off like this? But Dolinnik ... Dolinnik had said that he had 
been arrested for breaking the curfew... Then it dawned upon him. 

The Colonel began questioning the scraggy Zeitser with the usual 
“What are you in for?” 

The barber, pale with nervousness, blurted out: 

“They tell me I was agitating, but I haven’t any idea what my 
agitation consisted of.” 

Chernyak pricked up his ears. 

“What’s that? Agitation? What were you agitating about?” 

Zeitser spread out his arms in bewilderment. 

“I don’t know myself, I only said that they were collecting 
signatures to a petition to the Chief Ataman from the Jewish 
population.” 

“What sort of petition?” both Chernyak and the Captain moved 
menacingly toward Zeitser. 

“A petition asking that pogroms be prohibited. You know, we had 
a terrible pogrom. The whole population’s afraid.” 


145 



146 


“That’s enough,” Chernyak interrupted him. “We’ll give you a 
petition you won’t forget, you dirty Jew.” Turning to the Captain, he 
snapped: “Put this one away properly. Have him taken to headquarters 
— I’ll have a talk with him there personally. We’ll see who’s behind 
this petition business.” 

Zeitser tried to protest but the Captain struck him sharply across 
the back with his riding whip. 

“Shut up, you bastard!” 

His face twisted with pain, Zeitser staggered back into a corner. 
His lips trembled and he barely restrained the sobs that choked him. 

While this was going on, Pavel rose to his feet. He was now the 
only prisoner besides Zeitser in the storeroom. 

Chernyak stood in front of the boy and inspected him with his 
piercing black eyes. 

“Well, what are you doing here?” 

The Colonel’s question elicited a quick reply: “I cut off a saddle 
skirt for soles.” 

“Whose saddle was it?” the Colonel .asked. 

“We’ve got two Cossacks billeted at our place and I cut off the 
skirt of an old saddle for soles. So the Cossacks hauled me in here.” 
Seized by a wild hope to regain his freedom, he added: “I didn’t 
know it wasn’t allowed...” 

The Colonel eyed Pavel with disgust. 

“Of all the things this Commandant thought of, damn his hide! 
Look at the prisoners he picked up!” As he turned to the door, he 
shouted: “You can go home, and tell your father to give you the 
thrashing you deserve. Out with you!” 

Still unable to believe his ears, his heart pounding as if it would 
burst, Pavel snatched up Dolinnik’s jacket from the floor and rushed 
for the door. He ran through the guardroom and slipped out into the 
open air behind the back of the Colonel as he walked out into the yard. 
In a moment Pavel was through the wicket gate and in the street. 

The unlucky Zeitser remained alone in the store-room. He looked 
round with harassed eyes, instinctively took a few steps toward the 


147 


exit, but just then a sentry entered the guardhouse, closed the door, 
inserted the padlock, and sat down on a stool next to the door. 

Out on the porch Chernyak, pleased with himself, said to the 
Captain: 

“It’s a good thing we looked in. Think of the rubbish we found 
there - we’ll have to lock up that Commandant for a couple of weeks. 
Well, it’s time we were going.” 

The Sergeant had mustered his detail in the yard. When he saw the 
Colonel, he ran over and reported: 

“Everything’s in order, Pan Colonel.” 

Chernyak inserted a boot into a stirrup and sprang lightly into the 
saddle. The Captain was having some trouble with his restive horse. 
Reining in his mount, the Colonel said to the Sergeant: 

“Tell the Commandant that I let out all the rubbish he’d collected 
in there. And tell him I’ll give him two weeks in the guardhouse for 
the way he ran things here. As for the fellow in there now, transfer 
him to headquarters at once. Let the guard be in readiness.” 

“Very good. Pan Colonel,” the Sergeant saluted. 

Spurring on their horses, the Colonel and the Captain galloped 
back to the square where the parade was already coming to an end. 

Pavel swung himself over the seventh fence and stopped 
exhausted. He could go no further. Those days cooped up in the 
stifling storeroom without food had sapped his strength. 

Where should he go? Home was out of the question, and to go to 
the Bruzzhaks’ might bring disaster upon the whole family if anyone 
discovered him there. 

He did not know what to do, and ran on again blindly, leaving 
behind the vegetable patches and back gardens at the edge of the 
town. Colliding heavily with a fence, he came to himself with a start 
and looked about him in amazement: there behind the tall fence was 
the forest warden’s garden. So this was where his weary legs had 
brought him! He could have sworn that he had had no thought of 


148 


coming this way. How then did he happen to be here? For that he 
could find no answer. 

Yet rest awhile he must; he had to consider the situation and decide 
on the next step. He remembered that there was a summerhouse at the 
end of the garden. No one would see him there. 

Hoisting himself to the top of the fence, he clambered over and 
dropped into the garden below. With a brief glance at the house, 
barely visible among the trees, he made for the summerhouse. To his 
dismay he found that it was open on nearly all sides. The wild vine 
that had walled it in during the summer had withered and now all was 
bare. 

He turned to go back, but it was too late. There was a furious 
barking behind him. He wheeled round and saw a huge dog coming 
straight at him down the leaf-strewn path leading from the house. Its 
fierce growls rent the stillness of the garden. 

Pavel made ready to defend himself. The first attack he repulsed 
with a heavy kick. But the animal crouched to spring a second time. 
There is no saying how the encounter would have ended had a 
familiar voice not called out at that point: “Come here, Tresor! Come 
here!” 

Tonya came running down the path. She dragged Tresor back 
by the collar and turned to address the young man standing by the 
fence. 

“What are you doing here? You might have been badly mauled by 
the dog. It’s lucky I...” 

She stopped short and her eyes widened in surprise. How 
extraordinarily like Korchagin was this stranger who had wandered 
into her garden. 

The figure by the fence stirred. 

“Tonya!” said the young man softly. “Don’t you recognise me?” 
Tonya cried out and rushed impulsively over to him. 

“Pavel, you?” 

Tresor, taking the cry as a signal for attack, sprang forward. 


149 


“Down, Tresor, down!” A few cuffs from Tonya and he slunk back 
with an injured air toward the house, his tail between his legs. 

“So you’re free?” said Tonya, clinging to Pavel’s hands. 

“You knew then?” 

“I kn ow everything,” replied Tonya breathlessly. “Liza told me. 
But however did you get here? Did they let you go?” 

“Yes, but only by mistake,” Pavel replied wearily. “I ran away. I 
suppose they’re looking for me now. I really don’t know how I got 
here. I thought I’d rest a bit in your summerhouse. I’m awfully tired,” 
he added apologetically. 

She gazed at him for a moment or two and a wave of pity and 
tenderness mingled with anxiety and joy swept over her. 

“Pavel, my darling Pavel,” she murmured holding his hands fast in 
hers. “I love you... Do you hear me? My stubborn boy, why did you 
go away that time? Now you’re coming to us, to me. I shan’t let you 
go for anything. It’s nice and quiet in our house and you can stay as 
long as you like.” 

Pavel shook his head. 

“What if they find me here? No, I can’t stay in your place.” 

Her hands squeezed his fingers, her eyelids fluttered and her eyes 
flashed. 

“If you refuse I shall never speak to you again. Artem isn’t here, he 
was marched off under escort to the locomotive. All the railwaymen 
are being mobilised. Where will you go?” 

Pavel shared her anxiety, and only his fear of endangering this girl 
who had grown so dear to him held him back. But at last worn out by 
his harrowing experiences, hungry and exhausted, he gave in. 

While he sat on the sofa in Tonya’s room, the following 
conversation ensued between mother and daughter in the kitchen. 

“Listen, Mama, Korchagin is in my room. He was my pupil, you 
remember? I don’t want to hide anything from you. He was arrested 
for helping a Bolshevik sailor to escape. Now he has run away from 
prison, but he has nowhere to go.” Her voice trembled. “Mother dear, 
please let him stay here for a while.” 


150 


The mother looked into her daughter’s pleading eyes with a 
searching gaze. 

“Very well, I have no objection. But where do you intend to put 
him?” 

Tonya flushed scarlet. 

“He can sleep in my room on the sofa,” she said in deep confusion. 
“We needn’t tell Papa anything for the time being.” 

Her mother looked straight into her eyes. 

“Is this what you have been fretting about so much lately?” she 
asked. 

“Yes.” 

“But he is scarcely more than a boy.” 

“I know,” replied Tonya, nervously fingering the sleeve of her 
blouse. “But if he hadn’t escaped they would have shot him just the 
same.” 

Yekaterina Mikhailovna was clearly alarmed by Korchagin’s 
presence in her home. His arrest and her daughter’s obvious 
infatuation with a lad she scarcely knew disturbed her. 

But Tonya, considering the matter settled, was already thinking of 
attending to her guest’s comfort. 

“He must have a bath, first thing, Mama. I’ll see to it at once. He 
is awfully dirty, like a chimney sweep. It must be ages since he had 
a wash.” 

And she bustled off to heat the water for the bath and find some 
clean linen for Pavel. When all was ready she rushed into the room, 
seized Pavel by the arm and avoided unnecessary explanation by 
hurrying him off to the bathroom. 

“You must have a complete change of clothes. Here is a suit for 
you to put on. Your things will have to be washed. You can wear that 
in the meantime,” she said pointing to the chair where a blue sailor 
blouse with striped white collar and a pair of bell-bottomed trousers 
were neatly laid out. 

Pavel looked surprised. Tonya smiled. 

“I wore it at a masquerade ball once,” she explained. “It will be 


151 


just right for you. Now, hurry. While you’re washing, I’ll get you 
something to eat.” 

She went out and shut the door, leaving Pavel with no alternative 
but to undress and climb into the tub. 

An hour later all three, mother, daughter and Pavel, were dining 
in the kitchen. 

Pavel, who was ravenously hungry, consumed three helpings before 
he was aware of it. He was rather shy of Yekaterina Mikhailovna at 
first but soon thawed out when he saw how friendly she was. 

After dinner they retired to Tonya’s room and at Yekaterina 
Mikhailovna’s request Pavel related his experiences. 

“What do you intend doing now?” Yekaterina Mikhailovna asked 
when he had finished. 

Pavel pondered the question a moment. “I should like to see Artem 
first, and then I shall have to get away from here.” 

“But where will you go?” 

“I think I could make my way to Uman or perhaps to Kiev. I 
don’t know myself yet, but I must get away from here as soon as 
possible.” 

Pavel could hardly believe that everything had changed so quickly. 
Only that morning he had been in the filthy cell and now here he 
was sitting beside Tonya, wearing clean clothes, and what was most 
important, he was free. 

What queer turns life can take, he thought: one moment the sky 
seems black as night, and then the sun comes shining through again. 
Had it not been for the danger of being arrested again he would have 
been the happiest lad alive at this moment. 

But he knew that even as he sat here in this large, silent house he 
was liable to be caught. He must go away from here, anywhere, rather 
than remain. And yet he did not at all welcome the idea of going away. 
How thrilling it had been to read about the heroic Garibaldi! How he 
had envied him! But when you came to thi nk of it, Garibaldi’s must 
have been a hard life, hounded as he was from place to place. He, 


152 


Pavel, had only lived through seven days of misery and torment, yet 
it had seemed like a whole year. 

No, clearly he was not cut out to be a hero. 

“What are you thinking about?” Tonya asked, bending over toward 
him. The deep blue of her eyes seemed fathomless. 

“Tonya, shall I tell you about Khristina?” 

“Yes, do,” Tonya urged him. 

He told her the sad story of his fellow-captive. 

The clock ticked loudly in the silence as he ended his story. “... 
and that was the last we saw of her,” his words came with difficulty. 
Tonya’s head dropped and she had to bite her lips to force back the 
tears that choked her. 

Pavel looked at her. “I must go away tonight,” he said with 
finality. 

“No, no, I shan’t let you go anywhere tonight.” 

She stroked his bristly hair tenderly with her slim warm fingers... 

“Tonya, you must help me. Someone must go to the station and 
find out what has happened to Artem and take a note to Seryozha. 
I have a revolver hidden in a crow’s nest. I daren’t go for it, but 
Seryozha can get it for me. Will you be able to do this for me?” 

Tonya got up. 

“I’ll go to Liza Sukharko right away. She and I will go to the 
station together. Write your note and I’ll take it to Seryozha. Where 
does he live? Shall I tell him where you are if he .should want to see 
you?” 

Pavel considered for a moment before replying. “Tell him to bring 
it to your garden this evening.” 

It was very late when Tonya returned. Pavel was fast asleep. The 
touch of her hand awoke him and he opened his eyes to find her 
standing over him, smiling happily. 

“Artem is coming here soon. He has just come back. Liza’s father 
has agreed to vouch for him and they’re letting him go for an hour. 
The engine is standing at the station. I couldn’t tell him you are here. 


153 


I just told him I had something very important to tell him. There he 
is now!” 

Tonya ran to open the door. Artem stood in the doorway dumb 
with amazement, unable to believe his eyes. Tonya closed the door 
behind him so that her father, who was lying ill with typhus in the 
study, might not overhear them. 

Another moment and Artem was giving Pavel a bear’s hug that 
made his bones crack and crying: “Pavel! My little brother!” 

And so it was decided; Pavel was to leave the next day. Artem 
would arrange for Bruzzhak to take him on a train bound for 
Kazatin. 

Artem, usually grave and reserved, was now almost beside himself 
with joy at having found his brother after so many anxious days of 
worrying about his fate. 

“Then it’s settled. Tomorrow morning at five you’ll be at the 
warehouse. While they’re loading on fuel you can slip in. I wish I 
could stay and have a chat with you but I must be getting back. I’ll 
see you off tomorrow. They’re making up a battalion of railwaymen. 
We go about under an armed escort just like when the Germans were 
here.” 

Artem said goodbye to his brother and left. 

Dusk gathered fast, Sergei would be arriving soon with the pistol. 
While he waited, Pavel paced nervously up and down the dark room. 
Tonya and her mother were with the forest warden. 

He met Sergei in the darkness by the fence and the two friends 
shook hands warmly. Sergei had brought Valya with him. They 
conversed in low tones. 

“I haven’t brought the gun,” Sergei said. “That backyard of yours 
is thick with Petlyura men. There are carts standing all over the place 
and they had a bonfire going. So I couldn’t climb the tree to get the 
gun. It’s a damn shame.” Sergei was much put out. 

“Never mind,” Pavel consoled him. “Perhaps it’s just as well. It 


154 


would be worse if I happened to be caught on the way with the gun. 
But make sure you get hold of it.” 

Valya moved closer to Pavel. 

“When are you leaving?” 

“Tomorrow, at daybreak.” 

“How did you manage to get away? Tell us.” 

In a rapid whisper Pavel told them his story. Then he took leave of 
his comrades. Sergei’s unusual gravity betrayed his emotion. 

“Good luck, Pavel, don’t forget us,” Valya said in a choking 
voice. 

And with that they left him, the darkness swallowing them up in 
an instant. 

Inside the house all was quiet. The measured ticking of the clock 
was the only sound in the stillness. 

For two of the house’s inmates there was no thought of sleep that 
night. How could they sleep when in six hours they were to part, 
perhaps never to meet again. Was it conceivable in that brief space 
of time to give utterance to the myriad of ideas and thoughts that 
seethed within them? 

Youth, sublime youth, when passion, as yet unknown, is only 
dimly fell in a quickening of the pulse; when your hand coming in 
chance contact with your sweetheart’s breast trembles as if affrighted 
and falters, and when the sacred friendship of youth guards you from 
the final step! What can be sweeter than to feel her arm about your 
neck and her burning kiss on your lips! 

It was the second kiss they had exchanged throughout their 
friendship. Pavel, who had experienced many a beating but never a 
caress except from his mother, was stirred to the depths of his being. 
Hitherto life had shown him its most brutal side, and he had not 
known it could be such a glorious thing; now this girl had taught him 
what happiness could mean. 

He breathed the perfume of her hair and seemed to see her eyes in 
the darkness. 


155 


“I love you so, Tonya, I can’t tell you how much, for I don’t know 
how to say it.” 

His brain was in a whirl. How responsive her supple body... But 
youth’s friendship is a sacred trust. 

“Tonya, when all this mess is over I’m bound to get a job as a 
mechanic, and if you really want me. If you’re really serious and not 
just playing with me, I’ll be a good husband to you. I’ll never beat 
you, never do anything to hurt you, I swear it.” 

Fearing to fall asleep in each other’s arms - lest Tonya’s mother 
find them and think ill of them - they separated. 

Day was breaking when they fell asleep after having made a 
solemn compact never to forget one another. 

Yekaterina Mikhailovna woke Pavel early. He jumped quickly out 
of bed. While he was in the bath-room, putting on his own clothes 
and boots, with Dolinnik’s jacket on top, Yekaterina Mikhailovna 
woke Tonya. 

They hurried through the grey morning mist to the station. When 
they reached the timber yards by the back way they found Artem 
waiting impatiently for them beside the loaded tender. 

A powerful locomotive moved up slowly, enveloped in clouds of 
hissing steam. Bruzzhak looked out of the cab. 

Pavel bid Tonya and Artem a hasty farewell, then gripped the 
iron rail and climbed up into the locomotive. Looking back he saw 
two familiar figures at the crossing - the tall figure of Artem and the 
small graceful form of Tonya beside him. The wind tore angrily at the 
collar of her blouse and tossed her chest-nut hair. She waved to him. 

Artem glanced at Tonya out of the corner of his eye and noticing 
that she was on the verge of tears, he sighed. 

“Til be damned if there isn’t something up between these two,” he 
said to himself. “And me thinking Pavel is still a little boy!” 

When the train disappeared behind the bend he turned to Tonya 
and said; “Well, are we going to be friends?” And Tonya’s tiny hand 
was lost in his huge paw. 

From the distance came the rumble of the train gathering speed. 


156 


CHAPTER SEVEN 


F or a whole week the town, belted with trenches and enmeshed 
in barbed-wire entanglements, went to sleep at night and woke 
up in the morning to the pounding of guns and the rattle of rifle fire. 
Only in the small hours of the morning would the din subside, and 
even then the silence would be shattered from time to time by bursts 
of fire as the outposts probed out each other. At dawn men busied 
themselves around the battery at the railway station. The black snout 
of a gun belched savagely and the men hastened to feed it another 
portion of steel and explosive. Each time a gunner pulled at a lanyard 
the earth trembled under-foot. Three versts from town the shells 
whined over the village occupied by the Reds, drowning out all other 
sounds, and sending up geysers of earth. 

The Red battery was stationed on the grounds of an old Polish 
monastery standing on a high hill in the centre of the village. 

The Military Commissar of the battery, Comrade Zamostin, leapt 
to his feet. He had been sleeping with his head resting on the trail 
of a gun. Now, tightening his belt from which a heavy Mauser was 
suspended, he listened to the flight of the shell and waited for the 
explosion. Then the yard echoed to his resonant voice. 

“We’ll catch up on our sleep tomorrow, Comrades. Time to get 
up!” 

The gun crews slept beside their guns, and they were on their feet 
as quickly as the Commissar. All but Sidorchuk, who raised his head 
reluctantly and looked around with sleep-heavy eyes. 

“The swine - hardly light yet and they’re at it again. Just out of 
spite, the bastards!” 

Zamostin laughed. 


157 


“Unsocial elements, Sidorchuk, that’s what they are. They don’t 
care whether you want to sleep or not.” 

The artilleryman grumblingly roused himself. 

A few minutes later the guns in the monastery yard were in action 
and shells were exploding in the town. 

On a platform of planks rigged up on top of the tall smoke stack of 
the sugar refinery, a Petlyura officer and a telephonist were stationed. 
They had climbed up the iron ladder inside the chimney. 

From this vantage point, which gave them a perfect view of the 
entire town, they directed the fire of their artillery. Through their 
field glasses they could see every movement made by the Red troops 
besieging the town. Today the Bolsheviks were particularly active. 
An armoured train was slowly edging in on the Podolsk station, 
keeping up an incessant fire as it came. Beyond it the attack lines of 
the infantry could be seen. Several times the Red forces tried to take 
the town by storm, but the Petlyura troops were firmly entrenched 
on the approaches. The trenches erupted a squall of fire, filling the 
air with a maddening din which mounted into an unintermittent roar, 
reaching its highest pitch during the attacks. Swept by this leaden 
hailstonn, unable to stand the inhuman strain, the Bolshevik lines fell 
back, leaving motionless bodies behind on the field. 

Today the blows delivered at the town were more persistent and 
frequent than before. The air quivered from the reverberations of 
the gunfire. From the height of the smoke stack you could see the 
steadily advancing Bolshevik lines, the men throwing themselves on 
the ground only to rise again and press irresistibly forward. Now they 
had all but taken the station. The Petlyura division’s available reserves 
were sent into action, but they could not close the breach driven in 
their positions. Filled with a desperate resolve, the Bolshevik attack 
lines spilled into the streets adjoining the station, whose defenders, 
the third regiment of the Petlyura division, routed from their last 
positions in the gardens and orchards at the edge of the town by a 
brief but terrible thrust, scattered into the town. Before they could 
recover enough to make a new stand, the Red Army men poured into 


158 


the streets, sweeping away in bayonet charges the Petlyura pickets 
left behind to cover the retreat. 

Nothing could induce Sergei Bruzzhak to stay down in the 
basement where his family and the nearest neighbours had taken 
refuge. And in spite of his mother’s entreaties he climbed out of the 
chilly cellar. An armoured car with the name Sagaidachny on its side 
clattered past the house, firing wildly as it went. Behind it ran panic- 
stricken Petlyura men in complete disorder. One of them slipped into 
Sergei’s yard, where with feverish haste he tore off his cartridge belt, 
helmet and rifle and then vaulted over the fence and disappeared in 
the truck gardens beyond. Sergei looked out into the street. Petlyura 
soldiers were running down the road leading to the Southwestern 
Station, their retreat covered by an armoured car. The highway 
leading to town was deserted. Then a Red Army man dashed into 
sight. He threw himself down on the ground and began firing down 
the road. A second and a third Red Anny man came into sight behind 
him. Sergei watched them coming, crouching down and firing as they 
ran. A bronzed Chinese with bloodshot eyes, clad in an undershirt and 
girded with machine-gun belts, was running full height, a grenade in 
each hand. And ahead of them all came a Red Army man, hardly 
more than a boy, with a light machine gun. The sight of the first Red 
troops to enter the town filled Sergei with joy. He dashed out onto the 
road and shouted as loud as he could: 

“Long live the comrades!” 

So unexpectedly did he rush out that the Chinese all but knocked 
him off his feet. The Red Army man’s first reaction was to throw 
himself upon the boy, but the exultation on the latter’s face stayed 
him. 

“Where is Petlyura?” the Chinese shouted at him, panting 
heavily. 

But Sergei did not hear him. He ran back into the yard, picked 
up the cartridge belt and rifle abandoned by the Petlyura man and 
hurried after the Red Anny men. They did not notice him until they 
had stormed the Southwestern Station. Here, after cutting off several 


159 


trainloads of munitions and supplies and hurling the enemy into the 
woods, they stopped to rest and regroup. The young machine gunner 
came over to Sergei and asked in surprise: 

“Where are you from, Comrade?” 

“I’m from this town. I’ve been waiting for you to come.” 

Sergei was soon surrounded by Red Army men. 

“I kn ow him,” the Chinese said in broken Russian. “He yelled 
‘Long live comrades!’ He’s a Bolshevik, he’s with us, a good 
fellow!” he added with a broad smile, slapping Sergei on the shoulder 
approvingly. 

Sergei’s heart leapt with joy. He had been accepted at once, 
accepted as one of them. And together with them he had taken the 
station in a bayonet charge. 

The town bestirred itself. The townsfolk, exhausted by their 
ordeal, emerged from the cellars and basements and came out to the 
front gates to see the Red Army units enter the town. Thus it was that 
Sergei’s mother and his sister Valya saw Sergei marching along with 
the others in the ranks of the Red Army men. He was hatless, but 
girded with a cartridge belt and with a rifle slung over his shoulder. 

Antonina Vasilievna threw up her hands in indignation. 

So her Seryozha had got mixed up in the fight. He would pay for 
this! Fancy him parading with a rifle in front of the whole town! 
There was bound to be trouble later on. Antonina Vasilievna could no 
longer restrain herself: 

“Seryozha, come home this minute!” she shouted. “I’ll show you 
how to behave, you scamp! I’ll teach you to fight!” And at that she 
marched out to the road with the firm intention of bringing her son 
back. 

But this time Sergei, her Seryozha, whose ears she had so often 
boxed, turned a stem pair of eyes at his mother and burning with 
shame and a sense of injury snapped at her: 

“Stop shouting! I’m staying where I am.” And he marched past 
without stopping. 

Antonina Vasilievna was beside herself with anger. 


160 


“So that’s how you treat your mother! Don’t you dare come home 
after this!” 

“I won’t!” Sergei cried, without turning around. 

Antonina Vasilievna remained standing on the road in utter 
confusion. Past her moved the ranks of weatherbeaten, dust-covered 
fighting men. 

“Don’t cry, mother! We’ll make sonny a commissar,” a strong, 
jovial voice rang out. A burst of jollylaughter rippled through the 
platoon. Up at the head of the company voices struck up a song in 
unison: 

Comrades, the bugles are sounding, 

Shoulder your arms for the fray. 

On to the kingdom of liberty 
Boldly shall we fight our way ... 

The ranks joined in a mighty chorus and Sergei’s ringing voice 
merged in the swelling melody. He had found a new family. In it one 
bayonet was his, Sergei’s. 

On the gates of the Leszczinski house hung a strip of white 
cardboard with the brief inscription: “Rev-corn.” Beside it was an 
arresting poster of a Red Army man looking into your eyes and 
pointing his finger straight at you over the words: “Have you joined 
the Red Army?” 

The Political Department people had been at work during the 
night putting up these posters all over the town. Nearby hung 
the Revolutionary Committee’s first proclamation to the toiling 
population of Shepetovka- 

Comrades! 

The proletarian troops have taken this town. Soviet 
power has been restored. 

We call on you to maintain order. The bloody 
cutthroats have been thrown back, but if you want them 


161 


never to return, if you want to see them destroyed once 
and for all, join the ranks of the Red Army. Give all 
your support to the power of the working folk. Military 
authority in this town is in the hands of the chief of the 
garrison. Civilian affairs will be administered by the 
Revolutionary Committee. 

Signed: Dolinnik 

Chairman of the Revolutionary Committee. 

People of a new sort appeared in the Leszczinski house. The word 
“comrade,” for which only yesterday people had paid with their 
life, was now heard on all sides. That indescribably moving word, 
“comrade!” 

For Dolinnik there was no sleep or rest these days. The carpenter 
was busy establishing revolutionary government. 

In a small room on the door of which hung a slip of paper with the 
pencilled words “Party Committee” sat Comrade Ignatieva, calm and 
imperturbable as always. The Political Department entrusted her and 
Dolinnik with the task of setting up the organs of Soviet power. 

One more day and office workers were seated at desks and a 
typewriter was clicking busily. A Commissariat of Supplies was 
organised under nervous, dynamic Pyzycki. Now that Soviet power 
was firmly established in the town, Pyzycki, formerly a mechanic’s 
helper at the local sugar refinery, proceeded with grim determination 
to wage war on the bosses of the sugar refinery who, nursing a bitter 
hatred for the Bolsheviks, were lying low and biding their time. 

At a meeting of the refinery workers he summed up the situation 
in harsh, unrelenting terms. 

“The past is gone never to return,” he declared, speaking in Polish 
and banging his fist on the edge of the tribune to drive home his 
words. “It is enough that our fathers and we ourselves slaved all our 
lives for the Potockis. We built palaces for them and in return His 
Highness the Count gave us just enough to keep us from dying of 
starvation. 


162 



163 








“How many years did the Potocki counts and the Sanguszko princes 
ride our backs? Are there not any number of Polish workers whom 
Potocki ground down just as he did the Russians and Ukrainians? 
And yet the count’s henchmen have now spread the rumour among 
these very same workers that the Soviet power will rule them all with 
an iron hand. 

“That is a foul lie, Comrades! Never have workingmen of 
different nationalities had such freedom as now. All proletarians 
are brothers. As for the gentry, we are going to curb them, you may 
depend on that.” His hand swung down again heavily on the barrier 
of the rostrum. “Who is it that has made brothers spill each other’s 
blood? For centuries kings and nobles have sent Polish peasants to 
fight the Turks. They have always incited one nation against another. 
Thi nk of all the bloodshed and misery they have caused! And who 
benefited by it all? But soon all that will stop. This is the end of those 
vermin. The Bolsheviks have flung out a slogan that strikes terror 
into the hearts of the bourgeoisie: ‘Proletarians of all lands, unite!’ 
There lies our salvation, there lies our hope for a better future, for 
the day when all workingmen will be brothers. Comrades, join the 
Communist Party! 

“There will be a Polish republic too one day but it will be a 
Soviet republic without the Potockis, for they will be rooted out 
and we shall be the masters of Soviet Poland. You all know Bronik 
Ptaszinski, don’t you? The Revolutionary Committee has appointed 
him commissar of our factory. ‘We were naught, we shall be all.’ We 
shall have cause for rejoicing, Comrades. Only take care not to give 
ear to the hissing of those hidden reptiles! Let us place our faith in 
the workingman’s cause and we shall establish the brotherhood of all 
peoples throughout the world!” 

These words were uttered with a sincerity and fervour that came 
from the bottom of this simple workingman’s heart. He descended 
the platform amid shouts of enthusiastic acclaim from the younger 
members of the audience. The older workers, however, hesitated to 
speak up. Who knew but what tomorrow the Bolsheviks might have 


164 


to give up the town and then those who remained would have to pay 
dearly for every rash word. Even if you escaped the gallows, you 
would lose your job for sure. 

The Commissar of Education, the slim, well-knit Chemopyssky, 
was so far the only schoolteacher in the locality who had sided with 
the Bolsheviks. 

Opposite the premises of the Revolutionary Committee the 
Special Duty Company was quartered; its men were on duty at the 
Revolutionary Committee. At nights a Maxim gun stood ready in 
the garden at the entrance to the Revcom, a sinewy ammunition 
belt trailing from its breech. Two men with rifles stood sentry duty 
beside it. 

Comrade Ignatieva on her way to the Revcom went up to one of 
them, a young Red Army man, and asked: 

“How old are you, Comrade?” 

“Going on seventeen.” 

“Do you live here?” 

The Red Anny man smiled. “Yes, I only joined the army the day 
before yesterday during the fighting.” 

Ignatieva studied his face. 

“What does your father do?” 

“He’s an engine driver’s assistant.” 

At that moment Dolinnik appeared, accompanied by a man in 
uniform. 

“Here you are,” said Ignatieva, turning to Dolinnik, “I’ve found the 
very lad to put in charge of the district committee of the Komsomol. 
He’s a local man.” 

Dolinnik glanced quickly at Sergei - for it was he. 

“Ah yes. You’re Zakhar’s boy, aren’t you? All right, go ahead and 
stir up the young folk.” 

Sergei looked at them in surprise. “But what about the 
company?” 

“That’s all right, we’ll attend to that,” Dolinnik, already mounting 
the steps, threw over his shoulder. 


165 


By evening two days later the local committee of the Young 
Communist League of the Ukraine had been formed. 

Sergei plunged into the vortex of the new life that had burst 
suddenly and swiftly upon the town. It filled his entire existence so 
completely that he forgot his family although it was so near at band. 

He, Sergei Bruzzhak, was now a Bolshevik. For the hundredth 
time he pulled out of his pocket the document issued by the 
Committee of the Ukrainian Communist Party, certifying that he, 
Sergei, was a Komsomol and Secretary of the Komsomol Committee. 
And should anyone entertain any doubts on that score there was the 
impressive Mannlicher - a gift from dear old Pavel - in its makeshift 
canvas holster hanging from the belt of his tunic. A most convincing 
credential that! Too bad Pavlushka wasn’t around! 

Sergei’s days were spent on assignments given by the Revcom. 
Today too Ignatieva was waiting for him. They were to go down to 
the station to the Division Political Department to get newspapers 
and books for the Revolutionary Committee. Sergei hurried out of the 
building to the street, where a man from the Political Department was 
waiting for them with an automobile. 

During the long drive to the station where the Headquarters and 
Political Department of the First Soviet Ukrainian Division were 
located in railway cars, Ignatieva plied Sergei with questions. 

“How has your work been going? Have you formed your 
organisation yet? You ought to persuade your friends, the workers’ 
children, to join the Komsomol. We shall need a group of Communist 
youth very soon. Tomorrow we shall draw up and print a Komsomol 
leaflet. Then we’ll hold a big youth rally in the theatre. When we get 
to the Political Department I’ll introduce you to Ustinovich. She is 
working with the young people, if I’m not mistaken.” 

Ustinovich turned out to be a girl of eighteen with dark bobbed 
hair, in a new khaki tunic with a narrow leather belt. She gave Sergei 
a great many pointers in his work and promised to help him. Before he 
left she gave him a large bundle of books and newspapers, including 


166 


one of particular importance, a booklet containing the program and 
rules of the Komsomol. 

When he returned late that night to the Revcom Sergei found 
Valya waiting for him outside. 

“You ought to be ashamed of yourself!” she cried. “What do you 
mean by staying away from home like this? Mother is crying her eyes 
out and father is very angry with you. There’s going to be an awful 
row.” 

“No there isn’t,” he reassured her. “I haven’t any time to go 
home, honest I haven’t. I won’t be coming tonight either. But I’m 
glad you’ve come because I want to have a talk with you. Let’s go 
inside.” 

Valya could hardly recognise her brother. He was quite changed. 
He fairly bubbled with energy. 

As soon as she was seated Sergei went straight to the point. 

“Here’s the situation, Valya. You’ve got to join the Komsomol. 
You don’t know what that is? The Young Communist League. I’m 
running things here. You don’t believe me? All right, look at this!” 

Valya read the paper and looked at her brother in bewilderment. 

“What will I do in the Komsomol ?” 

Sergei spread out his hands. “My dear girl, there’s heaps to do! 
Look at me, I’m so busy I don’t sleep nights. We’ve got to make 
propaganda. Ignatieva says we’re going to hold a meeting in the 
theatre soon and talk about the Soviet power. She says I’ll have to 
make a speech. I thi nk it’s a mistake because I don’t know how to 
make speeches. I’m bound to make a hash of it. Now, what about 
your joining the Komsomol?” 

“I don’t kn ow what to say. Mother would be wild with me if I 
did.” 

“Never mind mother, Valya,” Sergei urged. “She doesn’t 
understand. All she cares about is to have her children beside her. But 
she has nothing against the Soviet power. On the contrary, she’s all 
for it. But she would rather other people’s sons did the fighting. Now 
is that fair? Remember what Zhukhrai told us? And look at Pavel, he 


167 


didn’t stop to think about his mother. The time has come when we 
young folk must fight for our right to make something of our lives. 
Surely you won’t refuse, Valya? Think how fine it will be. You could 
work with the girls, and I would be working with the fellows. That 
reminds me, I’ll tackle that red-headed devil Klimka this very day. 
Well, Valya, what do you say? Are you with us or not? I have a little 
booklet here that will tell you all about it.” 

He look the booklet of Komsomol rules out of his pocket and 
handed if to her. 

“But what if Petlyura comes back again?” Valya asked him in a 
low voice, her eyes glued to her brother’s face. 

This thought had not yet occurred to Sergei and he pondered it for 
a moment. 

“I would have to leave with all the others, of course,” he said. 
“But what would happen to you? Yes, it would make mother very 
unhappy.” He lapsed into silence. 

“Seryozha, couldn’t you enrol me without mother or anyone else 
knowing? Just you and me? I could help just the same. That would 
be the best way.” 

“I believe you’re right, Valya.” 

Ignatieva entered the room at that point. 

“This is my little sister Valya, Comrade Ignatieva. I’ve just been 
talking to her about joining the Komsomol. She would make a 
suitable member, but you see, our mother might make difficulties. 
Could we enrol Valya so that no one would know about it? You see, 
we might have to give up the town. I would leave with the army, of 
course, but Valya is afraid it would go hard with mother.” 

Ignatieva, sitting on the edge of a chair, listened gravely. 

“Yes,” she agreed. “That is the best course.” 

The packed theatre buzzed with the excited chatter of the 
youth who had come in response to notices posted all over town. 
A brass band of workers from the sugar refinery was playing. The 
audience, consisting mainly of students of the local high school and 


168 


Gymnasium, was less interested in the meeting than in the concert 
that was to follow it. 

At last the curtain rose and Comrade Razin, Secretary of the 
Uyezd Committee, who had just arrived, appeared on the platform. 

All eyes were turned to this short, slenderly built man with the 
small, sharp nose, and his speech was listened to with keen attention. 
He told them about the struggle that had swept the entire country and 
called on the youth to rally to the Communist Party. He spoke like an 
experienced orator but made excessive use of terms like “orthodox 
Marxists,” “social-chauvinists” and the like, which his hearers did 
not understand. Nevertheless, when he finished they applauded him 
warmly, and after introducing the next speaker, who was Sergei, he 
left. 

It was as he had feared: now that he was face to face with the 
audience, Sergei did not know what to say. He fumbled painfully for 
a while until Ignatieva came to his rescue by whispering from her 
seat at the presidium table: “Tell them about organising a nucleus.” 

Sergei at once went straight to the point. 

“Well, Comrades, you’ve heard all there is to be said. What we’ve 
got to do now is to form a nucleus. Who is in favour?” 

A hush fell on the gathering. Ustinovich stepped into the breach. 
She got up and told the audience how the youth was being organised 
in Moscow. Sergei in the meantime stood aside in confusion. 

He raged inwardly at the meeting’s reaction to the question of 
organising a nucleus and he scowled down at the audience. They hardly 
listened to Ustinovich. Sergei saw Zaiivanov whisper something 
to Liza Sukharko with a contemptuous look at the speaker on the 
platform. In the front row the senior Gymnasium girls with powdered 
faces were casting coy glances about them and whispering among 
themselves. Over in the comer near the door leading backstage was a 
group of young Red Army men. Among them Sergei saw the young 
machine gunner. He was sitting on the edge of the stage fidgeting 
nervously and gazing with undisguised hatred at the flashily dressed 


169 


Liza Sukharko and Anna Admovskaya who, totally unabashed, were 
carrying on a lively conversation with their escorts. 

Realising that no one was listening to her, Ustinovich quickly 
wound up her speech and sat down. Ignatieva took the floor next, and 
her calm compelling manner quelled the restless audience. 

“Comrades,” she said, “I advise each of you to think over what has 
been said here tonight. I am sure that some of you will become active 
participants in the revolution and not merely spectators. The doors 
are open to receive you, the rest is up to you. We should like to hear 
you express your opinion. We invite anyone who has anything to say 
to step up to the platform.” 

Once more silence reigned in the hall. Then a voice spoke up from 
the back. “I’d like to speak!” 

Misha Levchukov, a lad with a slight squint and the burly figure of 
a young bear, made his way to the stage. 

“The way things are,” he said, “we’ve got to help the Bolsheviks. 
I’m for it. Seryozhka kn ows me. I’m joining the Komsomol.” 

Sergei beamed. He sprang forward to the centre of the stage. 

“You see, Comrades!” he cried. “I always said Misha was one of 
us: his father was a switchman and he was crushed by a car, and that’s 
why Misha couldn’t get an education. But he didn’t need to go to 
Gymnasium to understand what’s wanted at a time like this.” 

There was an uproar in the hall. A young man with carefully 
brushed hair asked for the floor. It was Okushev, a Gymnasium 
student and the son of the local apothecary. Tugging at his tunic, he 
began: 

“I beg your pardon, Comrades. I don’t understand what is wanted 
of us? Are we expected to go in for politics? If so, when are we going 
to study? We’ve got to finish the Gymnasium. If it was some sport 
society, or club that was being organised where we could gather and 
read, that would be another matter. But to go in for politics means 
taking the risk of getting hanged afterwards. Sorry, but I don’t thi nk 
anybody will agree to that.” 

There was laughter in the hall as Okushev jumped off the stage 


170 


and resumed his seat. The next speaker was the young machine 
gunner. Pulling his cap down over his forehead with a furious gesture 
and glaring down at the audience, he shouted: 

“What’re you laughing at, you vermin!” 

His eyes were two burning coals and he trembled all over with 
fury. Taking a deep breath he began: 

“Ivan Zharky is my name. I’m an orphan. I never knew my mother 
or my father and I never had a home. I grew up on the street, begging 
for a crust of bread and starving most of the time. It was a dog’s life, I 
can tell you, something you mama’s boys know nothing about. Then 
the Soviet power came along and the Red Army men picked me up 
and took care of me. A whole platoon of them adopted me. They 
gave me clothes and taught me to read and write. But what’s most 
important, they taught me what it was to be a human being. Because 
of them I became a Bolshevik and I’ll be a Bolshevik till I die. I know 
damn well what we’re fighting for, we’re fighting for us poor folk, 
for the workers’ government. You sit there cackling but you don’t 
know that two hundred comrades were killed fighting for this town. 
They perished ...” Zharky’s voice vibrated like a taut string. “They 
gave up their lives gladly for our happiness, for our cause ... People 
are dying all over the country, on all the fronts, and you’re playing 
at merry-go-rounds here, Comrades,” he went on, turning suddenly 
to the presidium table, “you’re wasting your time talking to them 
there,” he jabbed a finger toward the hall. “Think they’ll understand 
you? No! A full stomach is no comrade to an empty one. Only one 
man came forward here and that’s because he’s one of the poor, an 
orphan. Never mind,” he roared furiously at the gathering, “we’ll get 
along without you. We’re not going to beg you to join us, you can go 
to the devil, the lot of you! The only way to talk to the likes of you is 
with a machine gun!” And with this parting thrust he stepped off the 
stage and made straight for the exit, glancing neither to right or left. 

None of those who had presided at the meeting stayed on for the 
concert. 

“What a mess!” said Sergei with chagrin as they were on their way 


171 


back to the Revcom. “Zharky was right. We couldn’t do anything 
with that Gymnasium crowd. It just makes you wild!” 

“There’s nothing to be surprised about,” Ignatieva interrupted 
him. “There were hardly any proletarian youth there at all. Most of 
them were either sons of the petty bourgeois or local intellectuals - 
philistines all of them. You will have to work among the sawmill and 
sugar refinery workers. But that meeting was not altogether wasted. 
You’ll find there are some very good comrades among the students.” 

Ustinovich agreed with Ignatieva. 

“Our task, Seryozha,” she said, “is to bring home our ideas, 
our slogans to everyone. The Party will focus the attention of all 
working people on every new event. We shall hold many meetings, 
conferences and congresses. The Political Department is opening a 
summer theatre at the station. A propaganda train is due to arrive in a 
few days and then we’ll get things going in real earnest. Remember 
what Lenin said - we won’t win unless we draw the masses, the 
millions of working people into the struggle.” 

Late that evening Sergei escorted Ustinovich to the station. On 
parting he clasped her hand firmly and held it a few seconds longer 
than absolutely necessary. A faint smile flitted across her face. 

On his way back Sergei dropped in to see his people. He listened 
in silence to his mother’s scolding, but when his father chimed in, 
Sergei took up the offensive and soon had Zakhar Vasilievich at a 
disadvantage. 

“Now listen, dad, when you went on strike under the Germans 
and killed that sentry on the locomotive, you thought of your family, 
didn’t you? Of course you did. But you went through with it just the 
same because your workingman’s conscience told you to. I’ve also 
thought of the family. I know very well that if we retreat you folks 
will be persecuted because of me. And I couldn’t sit at home anyway. 
You know how it is yourself, dad, so why all this fuss? I’m working 
for a good cause and you ought to back me up instead of kicking up 
a row. Come on, dad, let’s make it up and then ma will stop scolding 


172 


me too.” He regarded his father with his clear blue eyes and smiled 
affectionately, confident that he was in the right. 

Za kh ar Vasilievich stirred uneasily on the bench and through his 
thick bristling moustache and untidy little beard his yellowish teeth 
showed in a smile. 

“Dragging class consciousness into it, eh, you young rascal? You 
think that revolver you’re sporting is going to stop me from giving 
you a good hiding?” 

But his voice held no hint of anger, and mastering his confusion, 
he held out his callused hand to his son. “Carry on, Seryozha. Once 
you’ve started up the gradient I’ll not be putting on the brakes. But 
you mustn’t forget us altogether, drop in once in a while.” 

It was night. A shaft of light from the slightly open door lay on 
the steps. Behind the huge lawyer’s desk in the large room with 
its upholstered plush furniture sat five people: Dolinnik, Ignatieva, 
Cheka chief Timoshenko, looking like a Kirghiz in his Cossack fur 
cap, the giant railwayman Shudik and flat-nosed Ostapchuk from the 
railway yards. A meeting of the Revcom was in progress. 

Dolinnik, leaning over the table and fixing Ignatieva with a stern 
look, hammered out hoarsely: 

“The front must have supplies. The workers have to eat. As soon 
as we came the shopkeepers and market profiteers raised their prices. 
They won’t take Soviet money. Old tsarist money or Kerensky notes 
are the only kind in circulation here. Today we must sit down and 
work out fixed prices. We know very well that none of the profiteers 
are going to sell their goods at the fixed price. They’ll hide what 
they’ve got. In that case we’ll make searches and confiscate the 
bloodsuckers’ goods. This is no time for niceties. We can’t let the 
workers starve any longer. Comrade Ignatieva warns us not to go 
too far. That’s the reaction of a faint-hearted intellectual, if you ask 
me. Now don’t take offence, Zoya, I know what I’m talking about. 
And in any case it isn’t a matter of the petty traders. I have received 
information today that Boris Zon, the innkeeper, has a secret cellar in 
his house. Even before the Petlyura crowd came, the big shopowners 


173 


had huge stocks of goods hidden away there.” He paused to throw a 
sly, mocking glance at Timoshenko. 

“How did you find that out?” the latter inquired, taken aback. 
He was annoyed at Dolinnik’s being ahead of him with information 
which it was his, Timoshenko’s job to obtain. 

Dolinnik chuckled. “I kn ow everything, brother. Besides learning 
about the cellar, I happen to know that you and the Division 
Commander’s chauffeur polished off half a bottle of samogon 
between you yesterday.” 

Timoshe nk o fidgeted in his chair and a hush spread over his 
sallow features. 

“Good for you!” he exclaimed in unwilling admiration. But 
catching sight of Ignatieva’s disapproving frown, he went no further. 
“That blasted carpenter has his own Cheka!” he thought to himself as 
he eyed the Chairman of the Revcom. 

“Sergei Bruzzhak told me,” Dolinnik went on. “He kn ows 
someone who used to work in the refreshment bar. Well, that lad 
heard from the cooks that Zon used to supply them with all they 
needed in unlimited quantities. Yesterday Sergei found out definitely 
about that cellar. All that has to be done now is to locate it. Get the 
boys on the job, Timoshenko, at once. Take Sergei along. If we strike 
lucky we’ll be able to supply the workers and the division.” 

Half an hour later eight armed men entered the innkeeper’s home. 
Two remained outside to guard the entrance. 

The proprietor, a short stout man as round as a barrel, with a 
wooden leg and a face covered with a bristly growth of red hair, met 
the newcomers with obsequious politeness. 

“What is it, Comrades?” he inquired in a husky bass. “Aren’t you 
a bit late?” 

Behind Zon, stood his daughters in hastily donned dressing- 
gowns, blinking in the glare of Timoshe nk o’s flashlight. From the 
next room came the sighs and groans of Zon’s buxom wife who was 
hurriedly dressing. 

“We’ve come to search the house,” Timoshe nk o explained curtly. 


174 


Every square inch of the floor was thoroughly examined. A 
spacious bam piled high with sawn wood, several pantries, the 
kitchen and a roomy cellar - all were inspected with the greatest care. 
But not a trace of the secret cellar was found. 

In a tiny room off the kitchen the servant girl lay fast asleep. She 
slept so soundly that she did not hear them come in. Sergei wakened 
her gently. 

“You work here?” he asked. The bewildered sleepy-eyed girl drew 
the blanket over her shoulders and shielded her eyes from the light. 

“Yes,” she replied. “Who are you?” 

Sergei told her and, instructing her to get dressed, left the room. 

In the spacious dining room Timoshe nk o was questioning the 
innkeeper who spluttered and fumed in great agitation: 

“What do you want of me? I haven’t got any more cellars. You’re 
just wasting your time, I assure you. Yes, I did keep a tavern once but 
now I’m a poor man. The Petlyura crowd cleaned me out and very 
nearly killed me too. I am very glad the Soviets have come to power, 
but all I own is here for you to see,” and he spread out his short pudgy 
hands, the while his bloodshot eyes darted from the face of the Cheka 
chief to Sergei and from Sergei to the comer and the ceiling. 

Timoshe nk o bit his lips. 

“So you won’t tell, eh? For the last time I order you to show us 
where that cellar is.” 

“But, Comrade Officer, we’ve got nothing to eat ourselves,” the 
innkeeper’s wife wailed. ‘’’They’ve taken all we had.” She made an 
attempt to weep but nothing came of it. 

“You say you’re starving, but you keep a servant,” Sergei put in. 

“That’s not a servant. She’s just a poor girl who’s living with us, 
because she has nowhere to go. Khristina’ll tell you that herself.” 

Timoshenko’s patience snapped. “All right then,” he shouted, 
“now we’ll set to work in earnest!” 

Morning dawned and the search was still going on. Exasperated 
after thirteen hours of fmitless efforts. Timoshenko had already 
decided to abandon the quest when Sergei, on the point of leaving 


175 


the servant girl’s room he had been examining, heard the girl’s faint 
whisper behind him: “Look inside the stove in the kitchen.” 

Ten minutes later the dismantled Russian stove revealed an iron 
trapdoor. And within an hour a two-ton truck loaded with barrels and 
sacks drove away from the inn now surrounded by a crowd of gaping 
onlookers. 

Maria Yakovlevna Korchagina came home one hot day carrying 
her small bundle of belongings. She wept bitterly when Artem told 
her what had happened to Pavel. Her life now seemed empty and 
drear. She had to look for work, and after a time she began taking 
in washing from Red Army men who arranged for her to receive 
soldiers’ rations by way of payment. 

One evening she heard Artem’s footsteps outside the window 
sounding more hurried than usual. He pushed open the door and 
announced from the threshold: “I’ve brought a letter from Pavka.” 

Dear Brother Artem, 

This is to let you know, that I am alive although not altogether 
well. I got a bullet in my hip but I am getting better now. The 
doctor says the bone is uninjured. So don’t worry about me, I’ll 
be all right. I may get leave after I’m discharged from hospital 
and I’ll come home for a while. I didn’t manage to get to 
mother’s, what happened was that I joined the cavalry brigade 
commanded by Comrade Kotovsky, whom I’m sure you’ve 
heard about because he’s famous for his bravery. I have never 
seen anyone like him before arid I have the greatest respect for 
our commander. Has mother come home yet? If she has, give 
her my best love. 

Forgive me for all the trouble I have caused you. 

Your brother Pavel. 

Artem, please go to the forest warden s and tell them about this 
letter. 


176 


Maria Yakovlevna shed many tears over Pavel’s letter. The 
scatterbrained lad had not even given the address of his hospital. 

Sergei had become a frequent visitor at the green railway coach 
down at the station bearing the sign: “Agitprop Div. Pol. Dept.” In one 
of the compartments of the Agitation and Propaganda Car, Ustinovich 
and Ignatieva had their office. The latter with the inevitable cigarette 
between her lips smiled knowingly whenever he appeared. 

The Secretary of the Komsomol District Committee had grown 
quite friendly with Rita Ustinovich, and besides the bundles of books 
and newspapers, he carried away with him from the station a vague 
sense of happiness after every brief encounter with her. 

Every day the open-air theatre of the Division Political Department 
drew big audiences of workers and Red Army men. The agit-train of 
the Twelfth Army, swathed in bright coloured posters, stood on a 
siding, seething with activity twenty-four hours a day. A printing plant 
had been installed inside and news-papers, leaflets and proclamations 
poured out in a steady stream. The front was near at hand. 

One evening Sergei chanced to drop in at the theatre and found 
Rita there with a group of Red Army men. Late that night as he was 
seeing her home to the station where the Political Department staff 
was quartered, he blurted out: “Why do I always want to be seeing 
you. Comrade Rita?” And added: “It’s so nice to be with you! After 
seeing you I always feel I could go on working without stopping.” 

Rita halted. “Now look here, Comrade Bruzzhak,” she said, “let’s 
agree here and now that you won’t ever wax lyrical any more. I don’t 
like it.” 

Sergei blushed like a reprimanded schoolboy. 

“I didn’t mean anything,” he said, “I thought we were friends ... I 
didn’t say anything counter-revolutionary, did I? Very well, Comrade 
Ustinovich, I shan’t say another word!” 

And leaving her with a hasty handshake he all but ran back to 
town. 

Sergei did not go near the station for several days. When Ignatieva 


177 


asked him to come he refused on the grounds that he was too busy. 
As a matter of fact he was. 

Shudik was fired at as he was passing on his way home one night 
through a street inhabited mainly by Poles in managerial positions 
at the sugar refinery. The searches that followed brought to light 
weapons and documents belonging to a Pilsudski organisation 
kn own as the Strelets. 

A conference was called at the Revcom. Ustinovich, who was 
present, took Sergei aside and said in a calm voice: “So your philistine 
vanity was hurt, was it? You’re letting personal matters interfere with 
your work? That won’t do, Comrade.” 

And so Sergei resumed his visits to the green railway car. 

He attended a district conference and participated in the heated 
debates that lasted for two days. On the third day he went off with 
the rest of the conference delegates to the forest beyond the river 
and spent a day and a night fighting bandits led by Zarudny, one of 
Petlyura’s officers still at large. 

On his return he went to see Ignatieva and found Ustinovich 
there. Afterwards he saw her home to the station and on parting held 
her hand tightly. She drew it away angrily. Again Sergei kept away 
from the agitprop car for many days and avoided seeing Rita even 
on business. And when she would demand an explanation of his 
behaviour he would reply curtly; “What’s the use of talking to you? 
You’ll only accuse me of being a philistine or a traitor to the working 
class or something.” 

Trains carrying the Caucasian Red Banner Division pulled in at the 
station. Three swarthy-complexioned commanders came over to the 
Revcom. One of them, a tall slim man wearing a belt of chased silver, 
went straight up to Dolinnik and demanded in a tone that brooked no 
refusal: “No argument now. Fork out one hundred cartloads of hay. 
My horses are dying.” 

And so Sergei was sent with two Red Anny men to procure hay. 


178 


In one village they were attacked by a band of kulaks. The Red Army 
men were disarmed and beaten unmercifully. Sergei got off lightly 
because of his youth. All three were carted back to town by people 
from the Poor Peasants’ Committee. 

An armed detachment was sent out to the village and the hay was 
delivered the following day. 

Not wishing to alarm his family, Sergei stayed at Ignatieva’s 
place until he recovered from the effects of his misadventure. Rita 
Ustinovich came to visit him there and for the first time she pressed 
Sergei’s hand with a warmth and tenderness he himself would never 
have risked. 

One hot afternoon Sergei dropped in at the agit-car to see Rita. He 
read her Pavel’s letter and told her something about his friend. On his 
way out he threw over his shoulder: “I thi nk I’ll go to the woods and 
take a dip in the lake.” 

Rita looked up from her work. “Wait for me. I’ll come with you.’ 

The lake was as smooth and placid as a mirror. 

Its warm translucent water exhuded an inviting freshness. 

“Wait for me over by the road. I’m going in”, Rita ordered him. 

Sergei sat down on a boulder by the bridge and lifted his face to 
the sun. He could hear her splashing in the water behind him. 

Presently through the trees he caught sight of Tonya Tumanova 
and Chuzhanin, the Military Commissar of the agit-train, coming 
down the road arm-in-arm. Chuzhanin, in his well-made officer’s 
uniform with its smart leather belt and numberless straps and 
squeaking chrome-leather boots, cut a dashing figure. He was in 
earnest conversation with Tonya. 

Sergei recognised Tonya as the girl who had brought him the note 
from Pavel. She too looked hard at him as they approached. She 
seemed to be trying to place him. When they came abreast of him 
Sergei took Pavel’s last letter out of his pocket and went up to her. 

“Just a moment, Comrade. I have a letter here which concerns you 
partly.” 


179 


Pulling her hand free Tonya took the letter. The slip of paper 
trembled slightly in her hand as she read. 

“Have you had any more news from him?” she asked, handing the 
letter back to Sergei. 

“No,” he replied., 

At that moment the pebbles crunched under Rita’s feet and 
Chuzhanin, who had been unaware of her presence, bent over and 
whispered to Tonya: “We’d better go.” 

But Rita’s mocking, scornful voice stopped him. 

“Comrade Chuzhanin! They’ve been looking for you over at the 
train all day.” 

Chuzhanin eyed her with dislike. 

“Never mind,” he said surlily. “They’ll manage without me.” 

Rita watched Tonya and the Military Commissar go. 

“It’s high time that good-for-nothing was sent packing!” she 
observed dryly. 

The forest murmured as the breeze stirred the mighty crowns of 
the oaks. A delicious freshness was wafted from the lake. Sergei 
decided to go in. 

When he came back from his swim he found Rita sitting on a 
treetrunk not far from the road. They wandered, talking, into the 
depths of the woods. In a small glade with tall thick grass they 
paused to rest. It was peaceful in the forest. The oaks whispered to 
one another. Rita threw herself down on the soft grass and clasped 
her hands under her head. Her shapely legs in their old patched boots 
were hidden in the tall grass. 

Sergei’s eye chanced to fall on her feet. He noticed the neatly 
patched boots, then looked down at his own boot with the toe sticking 
out of a hole, and he laughed. 

“What are you laughing at?” she asked. 

Sergei pointed to his boot. “How are we going to fight in boots 
like these?” 

Rita did not reply. She was chewing a blade of grass and her 
thoughts were obviously elsewhere. 


180 


“Chuzhanin is a rotten Party member,” she said at last. “All our 
political workers go about in rags but he doesn’t thi nk of anybody 
but himself. He does not belong in the Party... As for the front, the 
situation there is really very serious. Our country has a long and 
bitter fight before it.” She paused, then added. “We shall have to fight 
with both words and rifles, Sergei. Have you heard about the Central 
Committee’s decision to draft one-fourth of the Komsomol into the 
army? If you ask me, Sergei, we shan’t be here for long.” 

Listening to her, Sergei was surprised to detect some new note 
in her voice. With her black limpid eyes upon him, he was ready 
to throw discretion to the winds and tell her that her eyes were like 
mirrors, but he checked himself in time. 

Rita raised herself on her elbow. “Where’s your pistol?” 

Sergei fingered his belt ruefully. “That kulak band took it away 
from me.” 

Rita put her hand into the pocket of her tunic and brought out a 
gleaming automatic pistol. 

“See that oak, Sergei?” she pointed the muzzle at a furrowed tru nk 
about twenty-five paces from where they lay. And raising the weapon 
to the level of her eyes she fired almost without taking aim. The 
splintered bark showered down. 

“See?” she said much pleased with herself and fired again. And 
again the bark splintered and fell in the grass. 

“Here,” she handed him the weapon with a mocking smile. “Now 
let’s see what you can do.” 

Sergei muffed one out of three shots. Rita smiled condescendingly. 
“I thought you’d do worse.” 

She put down the pistol and stretched out on the grass. Her tunic 
stretched tightly over her firm breasts. 

“Sergei,” she said softly. “Come here.” 

He moved closer. 

“Look at the sky. See how blue it is. Your eyes are that colour. And 
that’s bad. They ought to be grey, like steel. Blue is much too soft a 
colour.” 


181 


And suddenly clasping his blond head, she kissed him on the 
lips. 

Two months passed. Autumn arrived. 

Night crept up stealthily, enveloping the trees in its dark shroud. 
The telegraphist at Division Headquarters bent over his apparatus 
which was ticking out Morse and gathering up the long narrow 
ribbon that wound itself snakily beneath his fingers rapidly translated 
the dots and dashes into words and phrases: 

Chief of Staff First Division 

Copy to Chairman Revcom Shepetovka. 

Evacuate all official institutions in town within ten 
hours after receipt of this wire. Leave one battalion in town 
at disposal of commander N. regiment in command sector 
of front. Division Headquarters, Political Department, all 
military institutions to be moved to Baranchev station. 
Report execution of order to Division Commander. 


Ten minutes later a motorcycle was hurtling through the 
slumbering streets of the town, its acetylene headlight stabbing the 
darkness. It stopped, spluttering, outside the gates of the Revcom. 
The rider hurried inside and handed the telegram to the chairman, 
Dolinnik. At once the place was seething with activity. The special- 
duty company lined up. An hour later carts loaded with Revcom 
property were rumbling through the town to the Podolsk station 
where it was loaded into railway cars. 

When he learned the contents of the telegram Sergei ran out after 
the motorcyclist. 

“Can you give me a lift to the station. Comrade?” he asked the 
rider. 

“Climb on behind, but mind you hold on fast.” 

A dozen paces from the agitcar which had already been attached 


182 


to the train Sergei saw Rita. He seized her by the shoulders and, 
conscious that he was about to lose something that had grown 
ineffably dear and precious to him, whispered: “Good-bye, Rita, dear 
comrade! We’ll meet again sometime. Don’t forget me.” 

To his horror he felt the tears choking him. He must go at once. 
Not trusting himself to speak, he wrung her hand until it hurt. 

Morning found the town and station desolate and deserted. The 
last train had blown its whistle as if in farewell and pulled out, and 
now the rearguard battalion which had been left behind took up 
positions on either side of the tracks. 

Yellow leaves fluttered down from the trees leaving the branches 
bare. The wind caught the fallen leaves and swept them rustling 
along the paths. 

Sergei in a Red Army greatcoat, with canvas cartridge belts slung 
over his shoulders, occupied the crossing opposite the sugar refinery 
with a dozen Red Army men. The Poles were approaching. 

Avtonom Petrovich knocked at the door of his neighbour Gerasim 
Leontievich. The latter, not yet dressed, poked his head out of the 
door. 

“What’s up?” 

Avtonom Petrovich pointed to the Red Army men moving down 
the street, and winked: “They’re clearing out.” 

Gerasim Leontievich looked at him with a worried air: “What sort 
of emblem do the Poles have, do you know?” 

“A single-headed eagle, I believe.” 

“Where the devil can you find one?” 

Avtonom Petrovich scratched his head in consternation. 

“It’s all right for them,” he said after a moment or two of reflection. 
“They just get up and go. But you have to worry your head about 
getting in right with the new authorities.” 

The rattle of a machine gun tore into the silence. A locomotive 
whistle sounded unexpectedly from the station followed by the 


183 


detonation of a gun from the same quarter. A heavy shell bored its 
way high into the air with a loud whine and fell on the road beyond 
the refinery, enveloping the roadside shrubs in a cloud of blue smoke. 
Silent and grim the retreating Red Army troops marched through the 
street, turning frequently to look back as they went. 

A tear traced a chill path down Sergei’s cheek. Quickly he wiped it 
away, glancing furtively at his comrades to make sure that no one had 
seen it. Beside Sergei marched Antek Klopotowski, a lanky sawmill 
worker. His finger rested on the trigger of his rifle. Antek was gloomy 
and preoccupied. His eyes meeting Sergei’s, he confided the thoughts 
that were tonnenting him. 

“They’ll come down hard on our folks, especially mine because 
we’re Poles. You, a Pole, they’ll say, opposing the Polish Legion. 
They’re sure to kick my old man out of the sawmill and flog him. I 
told him to come with us, but he didn’t have the heart to leave the 
family. Hell, I can’t wait to get my hands on those accursed swine!” 
And Antek angrily pushed back the helmet that had slipped down 
over his eyes. 

...Farewell dear old town, unsightly and dirty though you are 
with your ugly little houses and your crooked roads. Farewell dear 
ones, farewell. Farewell Valya and the comrades who have remained 
to work in the underground. The Polish Whiteguard legions, alien, 
vicious and merciless, are approaching. 

Sadly the railway workers in their oil-stained shirts watched the 
Red Army men go. 

“We’ll be back. Comrades!” Sergei cried out with aching heart. 


CHAPTER EIGHT 


T he river gleams dully through the early morning haze; softly 
its waters gurgle against the smooth pebbles of the banks. In 
the shallows by the banks the river is calm, its silvery surface almost 


184 


unruffled; but out in midstream it is dark and restless, hurrying 
swiftly onward. A thing of majestic beauty, this river immortalised 
by Gogol. The tall right bank drops steeply down to the water, like a 
mountain halted in its advance by the broad sweep of the waters. The 
flat left ha nk below is covered with sandy spots left when the water 
receded after the spring floods. 

Five men lay beside a snub-nosed Maxim gun in a tiny trench dug 
into the river bank. This was a forward outpost of the Seventh Rifle 
Division. Nearest the gun and facing the river lay Sergei Bruzzhak. 

The day before, worn out by the endless battles and swept back by 
a hurricane of Polish artillery fire, they had given up Kiev, withdrawn 
to the left bank of the river, and dug in there. 

The retreat, the heavy losses and finally the surrender of Kiev to 
the enemy had been a bitter blow to the men. The Seventh Division 
had heroically fought its way through enemy encirclement and, 
advancing through the forests, had emerged on the railway line at 
Malin Station, and with one furious blow had hurled back the Polish 
forces and cleared the road to Kiev. 

But the lovely city had been given up and the Red Army men 
mourned its loss. 

The Poles, having driven the Red units out of Darnitsa, now 
occupied a small bridgehead on the left bank of the river beside the 
railway bridge. But furious counterattacks had frustrated all their 
efforts to advance beyond that point. 

As he watched the river flowing past, Sergei could not but think of 
what had happened the previous day. 

Yesterday, at noon, his unit had met the Poles with a furious 
counterattack; yesterday he had had his first hand-to-hand 
engagement with the enemy. A beardless Polish legionary had come 
swooping down upon him, his rifle with its long, sabre-like French 
bayonet thrust forward; he bounded toward Serge; like a hare, 
shouting something unintelligible. For a fraction of a second Sergei 
saw his eyes dilated with frenzy. The next instant Sergei’s bayonet 


185 


clashed with the Pole’s, and the shining French blade was thrust 
aside. The Pole fell... 

Sergei’s hand did not falter. He knew that he would have to go 
on killing, he, Sergei, who was capable of such tender love, such 
steadfast friendship. He was not vicious or cruel by nature, but he 
knew that he must fight these misguided soldiers whom the world’s 
parasites had whipped up into a frenzy of bestial hatred and sent 
against his native land. And he, Sergei, would kill in order to hasten 
the day when men would no longer kill one another. 

Paramonov tapped him on the shoulder. “We’d better be moving 
on, Sergei, or they’ll spot us.” 

For a year now Pavel Korchagin had travelled up and down his 
native land, riding on machine-gun carriages and gun caissons or 
astride a small grey mare with a nick in her ear. He was a grown man 
now, matured and hardened by suffering and privation. The tender 
skin chafed to the raw by the heavy cartridge belt had long since 
healed and a hard callous had formed under the rifle strap on his 
shoulder. 

Pavel had seen much that was terrible in that year. Together with 
thousands of other fighting men as ragged and ill-clad as himself but 
afire with the indomitable determination to fight for the power of 
their class, he had marched over the length and breadth of his native 
land and only twice had the storm swept on without him the first time 
when he was wounded in the hip, and the second, when in the bitterly 
cold February of 1920 he sweltered in the sticky heat of typhus. 

The typhus took a more fearful toll of the regiments and divisions 
of the Twelfth Army than Polish machine guns. By that time the 
Twelfth Army was operating over a vast territory stretching across 
nearly the whole of the Northern Ukraine blocking the further 
advance of the Poles. 

Pavel had barely recovered from his illness when he returned to his 
unit which was now holding the station of Frontovka, on the Kazatin- 
Uman branch line. Frontovka stood in the forest and consisted of a 


186 


small station building with a few wrecked and abandoned cottages 
around it. Three years of intermittent battles had made civilian life in 
these parts impossible. Frontovka had changed hands times without 
number. 

Big events were brewing again. At the time when the Twelfth 
Army, its ranks fearfully depleted and partly disorganised, was falling 
back to Kiev under the pressure of the Polish armies, the proletarian 
republic was mustering its forces to strike a crushing blow at the 
victory-drunk Polish Whites. 

The battle-seasoned divisions of the First Cavalry Army were 
being transferred to the Ukraine all the way from the North Caucasus 
in a campaign unparalleled in military history. The Fourth, Sixth, 
Eleventh and Fourteenth Cavalry divisions moved up one after 
another to the Uman area, concentrating in the rear of the front and 
sweeping away the Ma kh no bandits on their way to the scene of 
decisive battles. 

Sixteen and a half thousand sabres, sixteen and a half thousand 
fighting men tanned and weathered by the blazing steppe sun. 

To prevent this decisive blow from being thwarted by the enemy 
was the primary concern of the Supreme Command of the Red 
Army and the Command of the Southwestern Front at this juncture. 
Everything, was done to ensure the successful concentration of 
this huge mounted force. Active operations were suspended on 
the Uman sector. The direct telegraph lines from Moscow to the 
front headquarters in Kharkov and thence to the headquarters of 
the Fourteenth, and Twelfth armies hummed incessantly. Telegraph 
operators tapped out coded orders: “Divert attention Poles from 
concentration cavalry army.” The enemy was actively engaged only 
when the Polish advance threatened to involve the Budyonny cavalry 
divisions. 

The campfire shot up red tongues of flame. Dark spirals of smoke 
curled up from the fire, driving off the swarms of restless buzzing 
midges. The men lay in a semicircle around the fire whose reflection 


187 


cast a coppery glow on their faces. The water bubbled in mess-tins 
set in the bluish-grey ashes. 

A stray tongue of flame leaped out suddenly from beneath a 
burning log and licked at someone’s tousled head. The head was 
jerked away with a growl: “Damnation!” And a gust of laughter rose 
from the men grouped around the fire. 

A middle-aged man with clipped moustache wearing a serge tunic 
examined the muzzle of his rifle in the firelight and boomed: 

“The lad’s so full of book-learning he don’t feel the heat of the 
fire.” 

“You might tell the rest of us what you’re reading there, 
Korchagin?” someone suggested. 

The young Red Army man fingered his singed locks and smiled. 

“A real good book, Comrade Androshchuk. Just can’t tear myself 
away from it.” 

“What’s it about?” inquired a snub-nosed lad sitting next to 
Korchagin, laboriously repairing the strap of his pouch. He bit off 
the coarse thread, wound the remainder round the needle and stuck it 
inside his helmet. “If it’s about love I’m your man.” 

A loud guffaw greeted this remark. Matveichuk raised his close- 
cropped head and winked slyly at the snub-nosed lad: “Love’s a fine 
thing. Sereda,” he said. “And you’re such a handsome lad, a regular 
picture. Wherever we go the girls fairly wear their shoes out running 
after you. Too bad a handsome phiz like yours should be spoiled by 
one little defect: you’ve got a five-kopek piece instead of a nose. But 
that’s easily remedied. Just hang a Novitsky 10-pounder* on the end 
of it overnight and in the morning it’ll be all right.” 

The roar of laughter that followed this sally caused the horses 
tethered to the machine-gun carriers to whinny in fright. 

Sereda glanced nonchalantly over his shoulder. “It’s not your face 
but what you’ve got in your noodle that counts,” he tapped himself 


*The Novitsky grenade weighing about four kilograms and used to demolish wire 
entanglements. 


188 


on the forehead expressively. “Take you, you’ve got a tongue like a 
stinging nettle but you’re no better than a donkey and your ears are 
cold.” 

“Now then lads, what’s the sense in getting riled?” Tatarinov, the 
Section Commander, admonished the two who were ready to fly at 
each other. “Better let Korchagin read to us if he’s got something 
worth listening to.” 

“That’s right. Go to it, Pavlushka!” the men urged from all sides. 

Pavel moved a saddle closer to the fire, settled himself on it and 
opened the small thick volume resting on his knees. 

“The book is called The Gadfly, Comrades. The Battalion 
Commissar gave it to me. It’s got me, Comrades. If you’ll sit quietly 
I’ll read it to you.” 

“Fire away! And don’t worry, we won’t let anyone disturb us.” 

When, some time later Comrade Puzyrevsky, the Regimental 
Commander, rode up unnoticed to the campfire with his Commissar 
he saw eleven pairs of eyes glued to the reader. He turned to the 
Commissar: 

“There you have half of the regiment’s scouts,” he said, pointing 
to the group of men. “Four of them are raw young Komsomols, 
but they’re good soldiers all of them. The one who’s reading is 
Korchagin, and that one there with eyes like a wolfcub is Zharky. 
They’re friends, but they’re always competing with each other on 
the quiet. Korchagin used to be my best scout. Now he has a very 
serious rival. What they’re doing just now is political work, and 
very effective it is too. I hear these youngsters are called ‘the young 
guard.’ Most appropriate, in my opinion.” 

“Is that the political instructor reading?” the Commissar asked. 

“No. Kramer is the political instructor.” Puzyrevsky spurred his 
horse forward. 

“Greetings, Comrades!” he called. 

All heads turned toward the commander as he sprang lightly from 
the saddle and went up to the group. 

“Warming yourselves, friends?” he said with a broad smile and his 


189 


strong face with the narrow, slightly Mongolian eyes lost its severity. 
The men greeted their commander warmly as they would a good 
comrade and friend. The Commissar, who intended to ride on, did 
not dismount. 

Pushing aside his pistol in its holster, Puzyrevsky sat down next 
to Korchagin. 

“Shall we have a smoke?” he suggested. “I have some first-rate 
tobacco here.” 

He rolled a cigarette, lit it and turned to the Commissar: “You 
go ahead, Doronin, I’ll stay here for a while. If I’m needed at 
headquarters you can let me kn ow.” 

“Go on reading, I’ll listen too,” Puzyrevsky said to Korchagin 
when Doronin had gone. 

Pavel read to the end, laid the book down on his knees and gazed 
pensively at the fire. For a few moments no one spoke. All brooded 
on the tragic fate of the Gadfly. Puzyrevsky puffed on his cigarette, 
waiting for the discussion to begin. 

“A grim story that,” said Sereda, breaking the silence. “So there 
are people like that, in the world. Few men could stand what he did. 
But when a man has an idea to fight for he’s strong enough to stand 
anything.” Sereda was visibly moved. The book had made a deep 
impression on him. 

“If I could lay my hands on that priest who tried to shove a cross 
down his throat I’d finish the swine off on the spot!” Andryusha 
Fomichev, a shoemaker’s apprentice from Belaya Tserkov, cried 
wrathfully. 

“A man doesn’t mind dying if he has something to die for,” 
Androshchuk, pushing one of the pots closer to the fire with a stick, 
said in a tone of conviction. “That’s what gives a man strength. You 
can die without regrets if you know you’re in the right. That’s how 
heroes are made. I knew a lad once, Poraika was his name. Well, 
when the Whites cornered him in Odessa, be tackled a whole platoon 
singlehanded and before they could get at him with their bayonets he 
blew himself and the whole lot of them up with a grenade. And he 


190 


wasn’t anything much to look at. Not the kind of a fellow you read 
about in books, though he’d be well worth writing about. There’s 
plenty of fine lads to be found among our kind.” 

He stirred the contents of the mess-tin with a spoon, tasted it with 
pursed-up lips and continued: 

“There are some who die a dog’s death, a mean, dishonourable 
death. I’ll tell you something that happened during the fighting at 
Izyaslav. That’s an old town on the Goryn River built back in the 
time of the princes. There was a Polish church there, built like a 
fortress. Well, we entered that town and advanced single file along 
the crooked alleys. A company of Letts were holding our right flank. 
When we get to the highway what do we see but three saddled horses 
tied to the fence of one of the houses. Aha, we think, here’s where we 
bag some Poles’. About ten of us rushed into the yard. In front of us 
ran the commander of that Lettish company, waving his Mauser. 

“The front door was open and we ran in. But instead of Poles we 
found our own men in there. A mounted patrol it was. They’d got 
in ahead of us. It wasn’t a pretty sight we laid eyes on there. They 
were abusing a woman, the wife of the Polish officer who lived there. 
When the Lett saw what was going on he shouted something in his 
own language. His men grabbed the three and dragged them outside. 
There were only two of us Russians, the rest were Letts. Their 
commander was a man by the name of Bredis. I don’t understand 
their language but I could see he’d given orders to finish those 
fellows off. They’re tough lot those Letts, unflinching. They dragged 
those three out to the stables. I could see their goose was cooked. 
One of them, a great hulking fellow with a mug that just asked for a 
brick, was kicking and struggling for all he was worth. They couldn’t 
put him up against the wall just because of a wench, he yelped. The 
others were begging for mercy too. 

“I broke out into a cold sweat. I ran over to Bredis and said: 
‘Comrade Company Commander,’ I said, ‘let the tribunal try them. 
What do you want to dirty your hands with their blood for? The 
fighting isn’t over in the town and here we are wasting time with this 


191 


here scum.’ He turned on me with eyes blazing like a tiger’s. Believe 
me, I was sorry I spoke. He points his gun at me. I’ve been fighting 
for seven years but I admit I was properly scared that minute. I see 
he’s ready to shoot first and ask questions afterwards. He yells at me 
in bad Russian so I could hardly understand what he was saying: ‘Our 
banner is dyed with our blood,’ he says. ‘These men are a disgrace to 
the whole army. The penalty for banditry is death. ’ 

“I couldn’t stand it any more and I ran out of that yard into the 
street as fast as I could and behind me I heard them shooting. I knew 
those three were done for. By the time we got back to the others the 
town was already ours. 

“That’s what I mean by a dog’s death, the way those fellows died. 
The patrol was one of those that’d joined us at Melitopol. They’d 
been with Makhno at one time. Riffraff, that’s what they were.” 

Androshchuk stood his mess-tin beside him and proceeded to 
untie his bread bag. 

“You do come across scum like that on our side sometimes. 
You can’t account for everyone. On the face of it they’re all for the 
revolution. And through them we all get a bad name. But that was a 
nasty thing to see, I tell you. I shan’t forget it in a hurry,” he wound 
up, sipping his tea. 

Night was well advanced by the time the camp was asleep. Sereda’s 
whistling snores could be heard in the silence. Puzyrevsky slept with 
his head resting on the saddle. Kramer, the political instructor, sat 
scribbling in his notebook. 

Returning the next day from a scouting detail, Pavel tethered his 
horse to a tree and called over Kramer, who had just finished drinking 
tea. 

“Look, Kramer, what would you say if I switched over to the First 
Cavalry Army, eh? There’s going to be big doings there by the looks 
of it. They’re not being massed in such numbers just for fun, are 
they? And we here won’t be seeing much of it.” 

Kramer looked at him in surprise. 


192 


“Switch over? Do you think you can change units in the army the 
way you change seats in a cinema?” 

“But what difference does it make where a man fights?” Pavel 
interposed. “I’m not deserting to the rear, am I?” 

But Kramer was categorically opposed to the idea. “What about 
discipline? You’re not a bad youngster, Pavel, on the whole, but in 
some things you’re a bit of an anarchist. You think you can do as 
you please? You forget, my lad, that the Party and the Komsomol are 
founded on iron discipline. The Party must come first. And each one 
of us must be where he is most needed and not where he wants to be. 
Puzyrevsky turned down your application for a transfer, didn’t he? 
Well, there’s your answer.” 

Kramer spoke with such agitation that he was seized with a fit of 
coughing. This tall, gaunt man was a printer by profession and the 
lead dust had lodged itself firmly in his lungs and often a hectic flush 
would appear on his waxen cheeks. 

When he had calmed down, Pavel said in a low but firm voice: 

“All that is quite correct but I’m going over to the Budyonny army 
just the same.” 

The next evening Pavel was missing at the campfire. 

In the neighbouring village a group of Budyonny cavalrymen had 
formed a wide circle on a hill outside the schoolhouse. One giant of 
a fellow, seated on the back of a machine-gun carrier, his cap pushed 
to the back of his head, was playing an accordion. The instrument 
wailed and blared out of time under his inept fingers like a thing in 
torment, confusing the dashing cavalryman in unbelievably wide red 
riding breeches who was dancing a mad hopak in the centre of the 
ring. 

Eager-eyed village lads and lasses clambered on to the gun carrier 
and fences to watch the antics of these troopers whose brigade had 
just entered their village. 

“Go it, Toptalo! Kick up the earth! Ekh, that’s the stuff, brother! 
Come on there, you with the accordion, make it hot!” 


193 


But the player’s huge fingers that could bend an iron horseshoe 
with the utmost ease sprawled clumsily over the keys. 

“Too bad Ma kh no got Afanasi Kulyabka,” remarked one bronzed 
cavalryman regretfully. “That lad was a first-class accordion player. 
He rode on the right flank of our squadron. Too bad he was killed. A 
good soldier and the best accordion player we ever had!” 

Pavel, who was standing in the circle, overheard this last remark. 
He pushed his way over to the machine-gun carrier and laid his hand 
on the accordion bellows. The music subsided. 

“What d’you want?” the accordionist demanded with a scowl. 

Toptalo stopped short and an angry murmur rose from the crowd: 
“What’s the trouble there?” 

Pavel reached out for the instrument. “Let’s have a try,” he said. 

The Budyonny cavalryman looked at the Red infantryman with 
some mistrust and reluctantly slipped the accordion strap off his 
shoulder. 

With an accustomed gesture Pavel laid the instrument on his knee, 
spread the sinuous bellows out fan-wise and let go with a rollicking 
melody that poured forth with all the lusty vigour of which the 
accordion is capable: 

Ekh, little apple, 

Whither away? 

Get copped by the Cheka 
And that’s where you stay! 

Toptalo caught up the familiar tune and swinging his arms like 
some great bird be swept into the ring, executing the most incredible 
twists and turns, and slapping himself smartly on the thighs, knees, 
head, forehead, the shoe soles, and finally on the mouth in time with 
the music. 

Faster and faster played the accordion in a mad intoxicating 
rhythm, and Toptalo, kicking his legs out wildly, spun around the 
circle like a top until he was quite out of breath. 


194 



195 


On June 5, 1920, after a few brief but furious encounters 
Budyonny’s First Cavalry Army broke through the Polish front 
between the Third and Fourth Polish armies, smashed a cavalry 
brigade under General Sawicki stationed on its path and swept on 
toward Ruzhiny. 

The Polish command hastily formed a striking force and threw it 
into the breach. Five tanks were rushed from Pogrebishche Station to 
the scene of the fighting. But the Cavalry Army by-passed Zarudnitsy 
from where the Poles planned to strike and came out in the Polish 
rear. 

General Kornield’s Cavalry Division was dispatched in pursuit of 
the First Cavalry Army with orders to strike at the rear of the force, 
which the Polish command believed to be headed for Kazatin, one 
of the most important strategic points in the Polish rear. This move, 
however, did not improve the position of the Poles. Although they 
succeeded in closing the breach and cutting off the Cavalry Army, 
the presence of a strong mounted force behind their lines which 
threatened to destroy their rear bases and swoop down on their army 
group at Kiev was far from reassuring. As they advanced, the Red 
cavalry divisions destroyed small railway bridges and tore up railway 
track to hamper the Polish retreat. 

On learning from prisoners that the Poles had an army headquarters 
in Zhitomir (actually the headquarters of the whole front was 
located there), the commander of the First Cavalry Army decided 
to take Zhitomir and Berdichev, both important railway junctions 
and administrative centres. At dawn on June 7 the Fourth Cavalry 
Division was already on its way at full speed to Zhitomir. 

Korchagin now rode on the right flank of one of the squadrons in 
place of Kulyabko, the lamented accordionist. He had been enrolled 
in the squadron on the collective request of the men, who had not 
wanted to part with such an excellent accordion player. 

Without checking their foam-flecked horses they fanned out at 
Zhitomir and bore down on the city with naked steel flashing in the 
sun. 


196 


The earth groaned under the pounding hooves, the mounts 
breathed hoarsely, and the men rose in their stirrups. 

Underfoot the ground sped past and ahead the large city with 
its gardens and parks hurried to meet the division. The mounted 
avalanche flashed by the gardens and poured into the centre of the 
city, and the air was rent by a fear-inspiring battlecry as inexorable 
as death itself. 

The Poles were so stunned that they offered little resistance. The 
local garrison was crushed. 

Bending low over the neck of his mount, Korchagin sped along 
side by side with Toptalo astride his thin-shanked black. Pavel saw 
how the dashing cavalryman cut down with an unerring blow a Polish 
legionary before the man had time to raise his rifle to his shoulder. 

The iron-shod hooves grated on the paving stones as they careered 
down the street. Then, at an intersection they found themselves face 
to face with a machine gun planted in the very middle of the road and 
three men in blue uniforms and rectangular Polish caps bending over 
it. There was also a fourth, with coils of gold braid on his collar, who 
levelled a Mauser at the mounted men. 

Neither Toptalo nor Pavel could check their horses and they 
galloped toward the machine gun, straight into the jaws of death. 
The officer fired at Korchagin, but missed. The bullet whanged 
past Pavel’s cheek, and the next moment the Lieutenant had struck 
his head against the paving stones and was lying limp on his back, 
thrown off his feet by the horse’s onrush. 

That very moment the machine gun crackled in savage, feverish 
haste, and stung by a dozen leaden wasps Toptalo and his black 
crumpled to the ground. 

Pavel’s mount reared up on its hind legs, snorting with terror, and 
leapt with its rider over the prone bodies to the men at the machine 
gun. His sabre described a flashing arc in the air and sank into the 
blue rectangle of one of the anny caps. 

Again the sabre flashed upwards ready to descend upon a second 
head, but the frantic horse leapt aside. 


197 


Like a turbulent mountain stream the squadron now poured in at 
the street intersection and scores of sabres gleamed in the air. 

The long narrow corridors of the prison echoed with cries. 

The cells packed with men and women with gaunt, tonnented 
faces were in a turmoil. They knew there was fighting going on in 
the city, and they could hardly believe that this meant freedom, that 
the attackers that had so suddenly descended on the place were their 
own people. 

There was firing in the prison yard. Men running down the 
corridors. And then the cherished, poignantly familiar words: “You 
are free, Comrades!” 

Pavel ran to a locked door with a tiny window to which dozens 
of pairs of eyes were glued, and brought his rifle butt down fiercely 
against the lock again and again. 

“Wait, let me crack it with a bomb,” Mironov pushed Pavel aside 
and produced a hand grenade from a pocket. 

Platoon commander Tsygarchenko tore the grenade from his 
hands. 

“Stop, you fool, are you mad! They’ll bring the keys in a jiffy. 
What we can’t break down we’ll open with keys.” 

The prison guards were already being led down the corridor, 
prodded along with revolvers. Then the passage filled with ragged 
and unwashed men and women wild with joy. 

Throwing the cell door wide open, Pavel ran in-side. 

“Comrades, you’re free! We’re Budyonny’s men - our division’s 
taken the town!” 

A woman her eyes brimming with tears ran to Pavel and throwing 
her arms around him as it she had found someone near and dear to 
her, broke into sobs. 

The liberation of five thousand and seventy-one Bolsheviks whom 
the Polish Whites had driven into these stone dungeons to await 
shooting or the gallows and of two thousand Red Army political 
workers, was more important to the division’s fighting men than all 
the trophies they had captured, a greater reward than victory itself. 


198 


For seven thousand revolutionaries the impenetrable gloom of night 
had been supplanted by the bright sun of a hot June day. 

One of the prisoners, with skin as yellow as a lemon, rushed 
at Pavel in a transport of joy. It was Samuel Lekher, one of the 
compositors from the Shepetovka printshop. 

Pavel’s face turned grey as he listened to Samuel’s account of the 
bloody tragedy enacted in his native town and the words seared his 
heart like drops of molten metal. 

“They took us at night, all of us at once. Some scoundrel had 
betrayed us to the military gendarmerie. And once they had us in 
their clutches they showed no mercy. They beat us terribly, Pavel. 
I suffered less than the others because after the first few blows I 
dropped down unconscious. But the others were stronger than me. 

“We had nothing to hide. The gendarmes knew everything better 
than we did. They knew every step we had taken, and no wonder 
for there had been a traitor among us! I can’t talk about those days, 
Pavel. You know many of those who were taken. Valya Bruzzhak, 
and Rosa Gritsman, a fine girl just turned seventeen - such trusting 
eyes she had, Pavel! Then there was Sasha Bunshaft, you know him, 
one of our typesetters, a merry lad, always drawing caricatures of the 
boss. They took him and two Gymnasium students, Novoselsky and 
Tuzhits - you remember them too most likely. The others too were 
local people or from the district centre. Altogether twenty-nine were 
arrested, six of them women. They were all brutally tortured. Valya 
and Rosa were raped the first day. Those swine outraged the poor 
things in every possible way, then dragged them back to the cell more 
dead than alive. Soon after that Rosa began to rave and a few days 
later she was completely out of her mind. 

“They didn’t believe that she was insane, they said she was 
shamming and beat her unmercifully every time they questioned her. 
She was a terrible sight when they finally shot her. Her face was black 
with bruises, her eyes were wild, she looked like an old woman. 

“Valya Bruzzhak was splendid to the very end. They all died 


199 


like real fighters. I don’t know how they had the strength to endure 
it all. Ah, Pavel, how can I describe their death to you? It was too 
horrible. 

“Valya had been doing the most dangerous kind of work: she was 
the one who kept in touch with the wireless operators at the Polish 
headquarters and with our people in the district centre, besides which 
they found two grenades and a pistol when they searched her place. 
The grenades had been given to her by the provocateur. Everything 
had been framed so as to charge them with intending to blow up the 
headquarters. 

“Ah, Pavel, it is painful for me to speak of those last days, but since 
you insist I shall tell you. The military court sentenced Valya and two 
others to be hanged, the rest to be shot. The Polish soldiers who had 
worked with us were tried two days earlier. Corporal Snegurko, a 
young wireless operator who had worked in Lodz as an electrician 
before the war, was charged with treason and with conducting 
Communist propaganda among the soldiers and sentenced to be 
shot. He did not appeal, and was shot twenty-four hours after the 
sentence. 

“Valya was called in to give evidence at his trial. 

She told us afterwards that Snegurko pleaded guilty to the charge 
of conducting Communist propaganda but vigorously denied that he 
had betrayed his country. 

‘My fatherland,’ he said, ‘is the Polish Soviet Socialist Republic. 
Yes, I am a member of the Communist Party of Poland. I was drafted 
into the army against my will, and once there I did my best to open 
the eyes of other men like myself who had been driven off to the 
front. You may hang me for that, but not for being a traitor to my 
fatherland, for that I never was and never will be. Your fatherland is 
not my fatherland. Yours is the fatherland of the gentry, mine is the 
workers’ and peasants’ fatherland. And in my fatherland, which will 
come - of that I am deeply convinced - no one will ever call me a 
traitor.’ 

“After the trial we were all kept together. Just before the execution 


200 


we were transferred to the jail. During the night they set up the 
gallows opposite the prison beside the hospital. For the shooting they 
chose a place near a big ditch over by the forest not far from the road. 
A common grave was dug for us. 

“The sentence was posted up all over town so that everyone should 
know of it. The Poles decided to hold a public execution to frighten 
the population. From early morning they began driving the townsfolk 
to the place of execution. Some went out of curiosity, terrible though 
it was. Before long they had a big crowd collected outside the prison 
wall. From our cell we could hear the hum of voices. They had 
stationed machine guns on the street behind the crowd, and brought 
up mounted and foot gendannes from all parts of the area. 

A whole battalion of them surrounded the streets and vegetable 
fields beyond. A pit had been dug beside the gallows for those who 
were to be hanged. 

“We waited silently for the end, now and then exchanging a few 
words. We had talked everything over the night before and said our 
goodbyes. Only Rosa kept whispering to herself over in one corner of 
the cell. Valya, after all the beatings and outrages she had endured, was 
too weak to move and lay still most of the time. Two local Communist 
girls, sisters they were, could not keep back the tears as they clung 
to one another in their last farewell. Stepanov, a young man from the 
country, a strapping lad who had knocked out two gendarmes when 
they came to arrest him, told them to stop. ‘No tears. Comrades! You 
may weep here, but not out there. We don’t want to give those bloody 
swine a chance to gloat. There won’t be any mercy anyway. We’ve 
got to die, so we might as well die decently. We won’t crawl on our 
knees. Remember, Comrades, we’re going to die well.’ 

“Then they came for us. In the lead was Szwarkovski, the 
counterintelligence chief, a mad dog of a sadist if there ever was one. 
When he didn’t do the raping himself he amused himself by watching 
his gendarmes do it. We were marched to the gallows across the 
road between two rows of gendarmes, ‘canaries’ we called them on 


201 


account of their yellow shoulder-knots. They stood there with their 
sabres bared. 

“They hurried us through the prison yard with their rifle butts and 
made us form fours. Then they opened the gates and led us out into 
the street and stood us up facing the gallows so that we should see our 
comrades die as we waited for our turn to come. It was a tall gallows 
made of thick logs. Three nooses of heavy rope hung down from the 
crosspiece and under each noose was a platform with steps supported 
by a block of wood that could be kicked aside. A faint murmur rose 
from the sea of people which rocked and swayed. All eyes were fixed 
on us. We recognised some of our people in the crowd. 

“On a porch some distance away stood a group of Polish gentry 
and officers with binoculars. They had come to see the Bolsheviks 
hanged. 

“The snow was soft underfoot. The forest was white with it, and 
it lay thick on the trees like cotton fluff. The whirling snowflakes fell 
slowly, melting on our burning faces, and the steps of the gallows 
were carpeted with snow. We were scantily dressed but none of us 
felt the cold. Stepanov did not even notice that he was walking in his 
stocking feet. 

“Beside the gallows stood the military prosecutor and senior 
officers. At last Valya and the two other comrades who were to be 
hanged were led out of the jail. They walked all three arm in arm, 
Valya was in the middle supported by the other two for she had no 
strength to walk alone. But she did her best to hold herself erect, 
remembering Stepanov’s words: ‘We must die well, Comrades!’ She 
wore a woollen jacket but no coat. 

“Szwarkowski evidently didn’t like the idea of them walking arm- 
in-arm for he pushed them from behind. Valya said something and 
one of the mounted gendarmes slashed her full force across the face 
with his whip. A woman in the crowd let out a frightful shriek and 
began struggling madly in an effort to break through the cordon and 
reach the prisoners, but she was seized and dragged away. It must 
have been Valya’s mother. When they were close to the gallows 


202 


Valya began to sing. Never have I heard a voice like that - only a 
person going to his death could sing with such feeling. She sang the 
Warszawianka, and the other two joined in. The mounted guards 
lashed out in a blind fury with their whips, but the three did not 
seem to feel the blows. They were knocked down and dragged to the 
gallows like sacks. The sentence was quickly read and the nooses 
were slipped over their heads. At that point we began to sing: 

Arise, ye prisoners of starvation ... 

“Guards rushed at us from all sides and I just had time to see the 
blocks knocked out from under the platforms with rifle butts and the 
three bodies jerking in the nooses... 

“The rest of us had already been put to the wall when it was 
announced that ten of us had had our sentences commuted to 20 years 
imprisonment. The other sixteen were shot.” 

Samuel clutched convulsively at the collar of his shirt as if he 
were choking. 

“For three days the bodies hung there in the nooses. The gallows 
were guarded day and night. After that a new batch of prisoners were 
brought to jail and they told us that on the fourth day the rope that 
held the corpse of Comrade Toboldin, the heaviest of the three, had 
given way. After that they removed the other two and buried them 
all. 

“But the gallows was not taken down. It was still standing when 
we were brought to this place. It stands there with the nooses waiting 
for fresh victims.” 

Samuel fell silent staring with unseeing eyes before him, but Pavel 
was unaware that the story had ended. The three bodies with the 
heads twisted horribly to one side swayed silently before his eyes. 

The bugle sounding the assembly outside brought Pavel to himself 
with a start. 

“Let’s go, Samuel.” he said in a barely audible voice. 

A column of Polish prisoners was being marched down the 


203 


street lined with cavalry. At the prison gates stood the Regimental 
Commissar writing an order on his notepad. 

‘’Comrade Antipov,” he said, handing the slip of paper to a 
stalwart squadron commander, “take this, and have all the prisoners 
taken under cavalry escort to Novgorod-Volynsky. See that the 
wounded are given medical attention. Then put them on carts, drive 
them about twenty versts from the town and let them go. We have 
no time to bother with them. But there must be no maltreatment of 
prisoners.” 

Mounting his horse, Pavel turned to Samuel. “Hear that?” he said. 
“They hang our people, but we have to escort them back to their own 
side and treat them nicely besides. How can we do it?” 

The Regimental Commander turned and looked sternly at the 
speaker. “Cruelty to unarmed prisoners,” Pavel heard him say as 
if speaking to himself, “will be punished by death. We are not 
Whites!” 

As he rode off, Pavel recalled the final words of the order of 
the Revolutionary Military Council which had been read out to the 
regiment: 

“The land of the workers and peasants loves its Red Army. It is 
proud of it. And on that Army’s banners there shall not be a single 
stain.” 

“Not a single stain,” Pavel’s lips formed the words. 

At the time the Fourth Cavalry Division took Zhitomir, the 20th 
Brigade of the Seventh Rifle Division forming part of a shock corps 
under Comrade Golikov was crossing the Dnieper River in the area 
of Okuninovo village. 

The corps, which consisted of the 25th Rifle Division and a 
Bashkir cavalry brigade, had orders to cross the Dnieper and straddle 
the Kiev-Korosten railway at Irsha Station. This manoeuvre would 
cut off the Poles’ last avenue of retreat from Kiev. 

It was during the crossing of the river that Misha Levchukov of 
the Shepetovka Komsomol organisation perished. They were running 


204 


over the shaky pontoon bridge when a shell fired from somewhere 
beyond the steep bank opposite whined viciously overhead and 
plunged into the water, ripping it to shreds. The same instant Misha 
disappeared under one of the pontoons. The river swallowed him 
up and did not give him back. Yakimenko, a fair-haired soldier in a 
battered cap, cried out: “Mishka! Hell, that was Mishka! Went down 
like a stone, poor lad!” For a moment he stared horrified into the dark 
water, but the men running up from behind pushed him on: “What’re 
you gaping there for, you fool. Get on with you!” There was no time 
to worry about anyone. The brigades had fallen behind the others 
who had already occupied the right bank of the river. 

It was not until four days later that Sergei learned of Misha’s death. 
By that time the brigade had captured Bucha Station and swinging 
round to face Kiev was repulsing furious attacks by the Poles who 
were attempting to break through to Korosten. 

Yakime nk o threw himself down beside Sergei in the firing line. 
He had been firing steadily for some time and now he had difficulty 
forcing back the bolt of his overheated rifle. Keeping his head 
carefully lowered he turned to Sergei and said: “Got to give her a 
rest. She’s red hot!” 

Sergei barely heard him above the din of the shooting. 

When the noise subsided somewhat Yakime nk o remarked as if 
casually: “Your comrade got drowned in the Dnieper. He was gone 
before I could do anything.” That was all he said. He tried the bolt 
of his rifle, took out another clip and applied himself to the task of 
reloading. 

The Eleventh Division sent to take Berdichev encountered fierce 
resistance from the Poles. A bloody battle was fought in the streets of 
the town. The Red Cavalry advanced through a squall of machinegun 
fire. The town was captured and the remnants of the routed Polish 
forces fled. Trains were seized intact in the railway yards. But the most 
terrible disaster for the Poles was the exploding of an ammunition 
dump which served the whole front. A million shells went up in the 


205 


air. The explosion shattered window panes into tiny fragments and 
caused the houses to tremble as if made of cardboard. 

The capture of Zhitomir and Berdichev took the Poles in the 
rear and they came pouring out of Kiev in two streams, desperately 
fighting to make their way out of the steel ring encircling them. 

Swept along by the maelstrom of battle Pavel lost all sense of self 
these days. His individuality merged with the mass and for him, as 
for every fighting man, the word “I” was forgotten; only the word 
“we” remained: our regiment, our squadron, our brigade. 

Events developed with the speed of a hurricane. Each day brought 
something new. 

Budyonny’s cavalry army swept forward like an avalanche, 
striking blow after blow until the entire Polish rear was smashed to 
pieces. Drunk with the excitement of their victories, the mounted 
divisions hurled themselves with passionate fury at Novograd- 
Volynsky, the heart of the Polish rear. As the ocean wave dashes 
itself against the rock-bound shore, recedes and rushes on again, so 
they fell back only to press on again and again with awesome shouts 
of “Forward! Forward!” 

Nothing could save the Poles - neither the barbed-wire 
entanglements, nor the desperate resistance put up by the garrison 
entrenched in the city. And on the morning of June 27 Budyonny’s 
cavalry forded the Sluch River without dismounting, entered 
Novograd-Volynsky and drove the Poles out of the city in the direction 
of Korets. At the same time the Forty-Fifth Division crossed the 
Sluch at Novy Miropol, and the Kotovsky cavalry brigade swooped 
down upon the settlement of Fyubar. 

The radio station of the First Cavalry Army received an order from 
the commander-in-chief of the front to concentrate the entire cavalry 
force for the capture of Rovno. The irresistible onslaught of the Red 
divisions sent the Poles scattering in demoralised panic-stricken 
groups. 

It was in these hectic days that Pavel Korchagin had a most 
unexpected encounter. He had been sent by the Brigade Commander 


206 



207 


• **• 




to the station where an annoured train was standing. Pavel took the 
steep railway embankment at a canter and reined in at the steel-grey 
head carriage. With the black muzzles of guns protruding from the 
turrets, the annoured train looked grim and fonnidable. Several men 
in oil-stained clothes were at work beside it raising the heavy steel 
annour plating that protected the wheels. 

“Where can I find the commander of the train?” Pavel inquired of 
a leather-jacketed Red Army man carrying a pail of water. 

“Over there,” the man replied pointing to the locomotive. 

Pavel rode up to the engine. “I want to see the commander!” he 
said. A man with a pockmarked face, clad in leather from head to 
foot, turned. “I’m the commander.” 

Pavel pulled an envelope from his pocket. 

“Here is an order from the Brigade Commander. Sign on the 
envelope.” 

The commander rested the envelope on his knee and scribbled 
his signature on it. Down on the tracks a man with an oil can was 
working on the middle wheel of the locomotive. Pavel could only 
see his broad back and the pistol-butt sticking out of the pocket of his 
leather trousers. 

The train commander handed the envelope back to Pavel who 
picked up the reins and was about to set off when the man with the 
oil can straightened up and turned round. The next moment Pavel had 
leapt off his horse as though swept down by a violent gust of wind. 

“Artem!” 

The man dropped his oil can and caught the young Red Army man 
in a bear’s embrace. 

“Pavka! You rascal! It’s you!” he cried unable to believe his eyes. 

The commander of the armoured train and several gunners 
standing by looked on with broad smiles. 

“Fancy brothers bumping into each other like that!” they said. 

It happened on August 19 during a battle in the Lvov area. Pavel 
had lost his cap in the fighting and had reined in his horse. The 


208 


squadrons ahead had already cut into the Polish positions. At that 
moment Demidov came galloping through the bushes on his way 
down to the river. As he flew past Pavel he shouted: 

“The Division Commander’s been killed!” 

Pavel started. Letunov, his heroic commander, that man of sterling 
courage dead! A savage fury seized Pavel. 

With the blunt edge of his sabre he urged on his exhausted Gnedko 
whose bit dripped with a bloody foam and tore into the thick of the 
battle. 

“Kill the vermin, kill ‘em! Cut down the Polish szlachta! They’ve 
killed Letunov!” And blindly he slashed at a figure in a green uniform. 
Enraged at the death of their Division Commander, the cavalrymen 
wiped out a whole platoon of Polish legionaries. 

They galloped headlong over the battlefield in pursuit of the 
enemy, but now a Polish battery went into action. Shrapnel rent the 
air spattering death on all sides. 

Suddenly there was a blinding green flash before Pavel’s eyes, 
thunder smote his ears and red-hot iron seared into his skull. The 
earth spun strangely and horribly about him and began to turn slowly 
upside down. 

Pavel was thrown from the saddle like a straw. He flew right over 
Gnedko’s head and fell heavily to the ground. 

Instantly black night descended. 


CHAPTER NINE 


T he octopus has a bulging eye the size of a cat’s head, a glazed 
reddish eye green in the centre with a pulsating phosphorescent 
glow. The octopus is a loathsome mass of tentacles, which writhe 
and squirm like a tangled knot of snakes, the dry scaly skin rustling 
hideously as they move. The octopus stirs. He sees it next to his very 


209 


eyes. And now the tentacles creep over his body; they are cold and 
they sting like nettles. The octopus shoots out its sting, and it bites 
into his head like a leech, and, wriggling convulsively, it sucks at his 
blood. He feels the blood draining out of his body into the swelling 
body of the octopus. And the sting goes on sucking and the pain of its 
sucking is unbearable. 

Somewhere far far away he can hear human voices: 

“How is his pulse now?” 

And another voice, a woman’s, replies softly: 

“His pulse is a hundred and thirty-eight. His temperature 103.1. 
He is delirious all the time.” 

The octopus disappeared, but the pain lingered. Pavel felt someone 
touch his wrist. He tried to open his eyes, but his lids were so heavy 
he had not the strength to lift them. Why was it so hot? Mother must 
have heated the stove. And again he hears those voices: 

“His pulse is one hundred and twenty-two now.” 

He tries to open his eyelids. But a fire burns within him. He is 
suffocating. 

He is terribly thirsty, he must get up at once and get a drink. But 
why does he not get up? He tries to move but his limbs refuse to obey 
him, his body is a stranger to him. Mother will bring him some water 
at once. He will say to her: “I want to drink.” Something stirs beside 
him. 

Is it the octopus about to crawl over him again? There it comes, he 
sees its red eyes... 

From afar comes that soft voice: 

“Frosya, bring some water!” 

“Whose name is that?” But the effort to remember is too much for 
him and darkness engulfs him once more. Emerging presently from 
the gloom he recalls: “I am thirsty.” 

And hears voices saying: 

“He seems to be regaining consciousness.” 

Closer and more distinct now, that gentle voice: 


210 


“Do you want to drink, Comrade?” 

“Can it be me they are addressing? Am I ill? Oh yes, I’ve got the 
typhus, that’s it.” And for the third time he tries to lift his eyelids. 
And at last he succeeds. The first thing that reaches his consciousness 
through the narrowed vision of his slightly opened eyes is a red ball 
hanging above his head. But the red ball is blotted out by something 
dark which bends towards him, and his lips feel the hard edge of a 
glass and moisture, life-giving moisture. The fire within him subsides. 
Satisfied, he whispers: “That’s better.” 

“Can you see me, Comrade?” 

The dark shape standing over him has spoken, and just before 
drowsiness overpowers him he manages to say: “I can’t see, but I can 
hear...” 

“Now, who would have believed he would pull through? Yet see 
how he has clambered back to life! A remarkably strong constitution. 
You may be proud of yourself, Nina Vladimirovna. You have literally 
saved his life.” 

And the woman’s voice, trembling slightly, answers: 

“I am so glad!” 

After thirteen days of oblivion, consciousness returned to Pavel 
Korchagin. His young body had not wanted to die, and slowly he 
recovered his strength. It was like being bom again. Everything 
seemed new and miraculous. Only his head lay motionless and 
unbearably heavy in its plaster cast, and he had not the strength to 
move it. But feeling returned to the rest of his body and soon he was 
able to bend his fingers. 

Nina Vladimirovna, junior physician of the military clinical 
hospital, sat at a small table in her room turning the leaves of a 
thick lilac-covered notebook filled with brief entries made in a neat 
slanting handwriting. 

August 26,1920 

Some serious cases were brought in today by 
ambulance train. One of them has a very ugly head 


211 


wound. We put him in the corner by the window. He is 
only seventeen. They gave me an envelope with the papers 
found in his pockets and the case history. His name is 
Korchagin, Pavel Andreyevich. Among his papers were 
a well-worn membership card (No. 967) of the Young 
Communist League of the Ukraine, a torn Red Army 
identification book and a copy of a regimental order 
stating that Red Army man Korchagin was commended 
for exemplary fulfilment of a reconnaissance mission. 
There was also a note, evidently written by himself, 
which said: “In the event of my death please write to my 
relatives: Shepetovka. Railway Depot, Mechanic Artem 
Korchagin.” 

He has been unconscious ever since he was hit by 
a shell fragment, on August 19. Tomorrow Anatoli 
Stepanovich will examine him. 

August 27 

Today we examined Korchagin’s wound. It is very 
deep, the skull is fractured and the entire right side of 
the head is paralysed. A blood vessel burst in the right 
eye which is badly swollen. 

Anatoli Stepanovich wanted to remove the eye to 
prevent inflammation, but I dissuaded him, since there 
is still hope that the swelling might go down. In doing 
this I was prompted solely by aesthetic considerations. 

The lad may recover; it would be a pity if he were 
disfigured. 

He is delirious all the time and terribly restless. One 
of us is constantly on duty at his bedside. I spend much 
of my time with him. He is too young to die and I am 
determined to tear his young life out of Death’s clutches. 
I must succeed. 

Yesterday I spent several hours in his ward after my 


212 


shift was over. His is the worst case there. I sat listening 
to his ravings. Sometimes they sound like a story, and 
I learn quite a lot about his life. But at times he curses 
horribly. He uses frightful language. Somehow it 
hurts me to hear such awful cursing from him. Anatoli 
Stepanovich does not believe that he will recover. “I can’t 
understand what the army wants with such children,” 
the old man growls. “It’s a disgrace.” 

August 30 

Korchagin is still unconscious. He has been removed 
to the ward for hopeless cases. The nurse Frosya is 
almost constantly at his side. It appears she knows 
him. They worked together at one time. How gentle she 
is with him! Now I too am beginning to think that his 
condition is hopeless. 

September 2,11 p. m. 

This has been a wonderful day for me. My patient 
Korchagin regained consciousness. The crisis is over. I 
spent the past two days at the hospital without going 
home. 

I cannot describe my joy at the knowledge that one 
more life has been saved. One death less in our ward. 
The recovery of a patient is the most wonderful thing 
about this exhausting work of mine. They become like 
children. Their affection is simple and sincere, and I too 
grow fond of them so that when they leave I often weep. 
I know it is foolish of me, but I cannot help it. 

September 10 

Today I wrote Korchagin’s first letter to his family. 
He writes his wound is not serious and he’ll soon recover 
and come home. He has lost a great deal of blood and is 
as pale as a ghost, and still very weak. 


213 


September 14 

Korchagin smiled today for the first time. He has a 
very nice smile. Usually he is grave beyond his years. He 
is making a remarkably rapid recovery. He and Frosya 
are great friends. I often see her at his bedside. She 
must have been talking to him about me, and evidently 
singing my praises, for now the patient greets me with a 
faint smile. Yesterday he asked. 

“What are those black marks on your arms, doctor?” 

I did not tell him that those bruises had been made by 
his fingers clutching my arm convulsively when he was 
delirious. 

September 17 

The wound on Korchagin’s forehead is healing nicely. 
We doctors are amazed at the remarkable fortitude with 
which this young man endures the painful business of 
dressing his wound. Usually in such cases the patient 
groans a great deal and is generally troublesome. But 
this one lies quietly and when the open wound is daubed 
with iodine he draws himself taut like a violin string. 
Often he loses consciousness, but not once have we heard 
a groan escape him. 

We know now that when Korchagin groans he 
is unconscious. Where does he get that tremendous 
endurance, I wonder? 

September 21 

We wheeled Korchagin out onto the big balcony today 
for the first time. How his face lit up when he saw the 
garden, how greedily he breathed in the fresh air! His 
head is swathed in bandages and only one eye is open. 
And that live, shining eye looked out on the world as if 
seeing it for the first time. 


214 


September 26 

Today two young women came to the hospital asking 
to see Korchagin. I went downstairs to the waiting room 
to speak to them. One of them was very beautiful. They 
introduced themselves as Tonya Tumanova and Tatiana 
Buranovskaya. I had heard of Tonya, Korchagin had 
mentioned the name when he was delirious. I gave them 
permission to see him. 

October 8 

Korchagin now walks alone in the garden. He keeps 
asking me when he can leave hospital. I tell him - soon. 
The two girls come to see him every visiting day. I know 
now why he never groans. I asked him, and he replied: 
“Read The Gadfly and you’ll know.” 

October 14 

Korchagin has been discharged. He took leave of me 
very warmly. The bandage has been removed from his 
eye and now only his head is bound. The eye is blind, 
but looks quite normal. It was very sad to part with this 
fine young comrade. But that’s how it is: once they’ve 
recovered they leave us and rarely do we ever see them 
again. 

As he left he said: “Pity it wasn’t the left eye. How will 
I be able to shoot now?” 

He still thinks of the front. 

After his discharge from hospital Pavel lived for a time at the 
Buranovskys’ where Tonya was staying. 

Pavel sought at once to draw Tonya into Komsomol activities. He 
began by inviting her to attend a meeting of the town’s Komsomol. 
Tonya agreed to go, but when she emerged from her room where she 
had been dressing for the meeting Pavel bit his lips in chagrin. She 


215 


was very smartly attired, with a studied elegance which Pavel felt 
would be entirely out of place at a Komsomol gathering. 

This was the cause of their first quarrel. When he asked her why 
she had dressed up like that she took offence. 

“I don’t see why I must look like everyone else. But if my clothes 
don’t suit you, I can stay at home.” 

At the club Tonya’s fine clothes were so conspicuous among all the 
faded tunics and shabby blouses that Pavel was deeply embarrassed. 
The young people treated her as an outsider, and Tonya, conscious of 
their disapproval, assumed a contemptuous, defiant air. 

Pankratov, the secretary of the Komsomol organisation at the 
shipping wharves, a broad-shouldered docker in a coarse linen shirt, 
called Pavel aside, and indicating Tonya with his eyes, said with a 
scowl: 

“Was it you who brought that doll here?” 

“Yes,” Pavel replied curtly. 

“Mm,” observed Pankratov. “She doesn’t belong here by the looks 
of her. Too bourgeois-looking. How did she get in?” 

Pavel’s temples pounded. 

“She is a friend of mine. I brought her here. Understand? She isn’t 
hostile to us at all, even if she does thi nk too much about clothes. 
You can’t always judge people by the way they dress. I know as 
well as you do whom to bring here so you needn’t be so officious, 
Comrade.” 

He wanted to say something sharp and insulting but realising that 
Pankratov was voicing the general opinion he desisted, and vented all 
his wrath on Tonya. 

“I told her what to expect! Why the devil must she put on such 
airs?” 

That evening marked the beginning of the end of their friendship. 
With bitterness and dismay Pavel watched the break-up of a 
relationship that had seemed so enduring. 

Several more days passed, and with every meeting, every 


216 


conversation they drifted farther and farther apart. Tonya’s cheap 
individualism became unbearable to Pavel. 

Both realised that a break was inevitable. 

Today they had met in the Kupechesky Gardens for the last time. 
The paths were strewn with decaying leaves. They stood by the 
balustrade at the top of the cliff and looked down at the grey waters 
of the Dnieper. From behind the towering hulk of the bridge a tug 
came crawling wearily down the river with two heavy barges in tow. 
The setting sun painted the Trukhanov Island with daubs of gold and 
set the windows of the houses on fire. 

Tonya looked at the golden shafts of sunlight and said with deep 
sadness: 

“Is our friendship going to fade like that dying sun?” 

Pavel, who had been feasting his eyes on her face, knitted his 
brows sternly and answered in a low voice: 

“Tonya, we have gone over this before. You know, of course, that 
I loved you, and even now my love might return, but for that you 
must be with us. I am not the Pavlusha I was before. And I would be 
a poor husband to you if you expect me to put you before the Party. 
Fori shall always put the Party first, and you and my other loved ones 
second.” 

Tonya stared miserably down at the dark-blue water and her eyes 
filled with tears. 

Pavel gazed at the profile he had come to know so well, her thick 
chestnut hair, and a wave of pity for this girl who had once been so 
near and dear to him swept over him. 

Gently he laid bis hand on her shoulder. 

“Tonya, cut yourself loose and come to us. Let’s work together 
to finish with the bosses. There are many splendid girls among us 
who are sharing the burden of this bitter struggle, enduring all the 
hardships and privation. They may not be so well educated as you 
are, but why, oh why, don’t you want to join us? You say Chuzhanin 
tried to seduce you, but he is a degenerate, not a fighter. You say the 
comrades were unfriendly toward you. Then why did you have to 


217 


dress up as if you were going to a bourgeois ball? It’s your silly pride 
that’s to blame: why should I wear a dirty old army tunic just because 
everybody else does? You had the courage to love a workingman, but 
you cannot love an idea. I am sorry to have to part with you, and I 
should like to cherish your memory.” 

He said no more. 

The next day he saw an order posted up in the street signed by 
Zhukhrai, chairman of the regional Cheka. His heart leapt. It was 
with great difficulty that he gained admission to the sailor’s office. 
The sentries would not let him in and he raised such a fuss that he was 
very nearly arrested, but in the end he had his way. 

Fyodor gave him a very warm welcome. The sailor had lost an 
arm; it had been torn off by a shell. 

The conversation turned at once to work. “You can help me crush 
the counter-revolution here until you’re fit for the front again. Start 
tomorrow,” said Zhukhrai. 

The struggle with the Polish Whites came to an end. The Red 
armies pursued the enemy almost to the very walls of Warsaw, but 
with their material and physical strength expended and their supply 
bases left far behind, they were unable to take this final stronghold 
and so fell back. Thus the “miracle on the Vistula,” as the Poles called 
the withdrawal of the Red forces from Warsaw, came to pass, and the 
Poland of the gentry received a new lease of life. The dream of the 
Polish Soviet Socialist Republic was not yet to be fulfilled. 

The blood-drenched land demanded a respite. 

Pavel was unable to see his people, for Shepelovka was again in 
Polish hands and had become a temporary frontier outpost. Peace 
talks were in progress. 

Pavel spent days and nights in the Cheka carrying out diverse 
assignments. He was much upset when he learned that his home¬ 
town was occupied by the Poles. 

“Does that mean my mother will be on the other side of the border 
if the armistice is signed now?” he asked Zhukhrai. 


218 


But Fyodor calmed his fears. 

“Most likely the frontier will pass through Goryn along the river, 
which means that your town will be on our side,” he said. “In any 
case we’ll know soon enough.” 

Divisions were being transferred from the Polish front to the 
South. For while the republic had been straining every effort on the 
Polish front, Wrangel had taken advantage of the respite to crawl out 
of his Crimean lair and advance northward along the Dnieper with 
Yekaterinoslav Gubernia as his immediate objective. 

Now that the war with the Poles was over, the republic rushed 
its armies to the Crimea to wipe out the last hotbed of counter¬ 
revolution. 

Trainloads of troops, carts, field kitchens and guns passed through 
Kiev en route to the South. The Cheka of the transport services of 
the area worked at fever pitch these days coping with the bottlenecks 
caused by the huge flood of traffic. Stations were jammed with 
trains and frequently traffic would be held up for lack of free tracks. 
Telegraph operators tapped out countless peremptory messages 
ordering the line cleared for this or that division. The tickers spilled 
out endless ribbons of tape covered with dots and dashes and each 
of them demanding priority: “Precedence above all else ... this is a 
military order ... free line immediately...” And nearly every message 
included a reminder that failure to carry out the order would entail 
prosecution by a revolutionary military tribunal. 

The local transport Cheka was responsible for keeping traffic 
moving without interruption. 

Commanders of army units would burst into its headquarters 
brandishing revolvers and demanding that their trains be despatched 
at once in accordance with telegram number so-and-so signed by 
the commander of the army. And none of them would accept the 
explanation that this was impossible. “You’ll get that train off if you 
croak doing it!” And a string of frightful curses would follow. In 
particularly serious cases Zhukhrai would be urgently sent for, and 
then the excited men who were ready to shoot each other on the spot 


219 


would calm down at once. At the sight of this man of iron with his 
quiet icy voice that brooked no argument revolvers were thrust back 
into their holsters. 

At times Pavel would stagger out of his office onto the platform 
with a stabbing pain in his head. Work in the Cheka was having a 
devastating effect on his nerves. 

One day he caught sight of Sergei Bruzzhak on a flat-car loaded 
with ammunition crates. Sergei jumped off the car nearly knocking 
Pavel off his feet and flung his arms round his friend. 

“Pavka, you devil! I knew it was you the minute I laid eyes on 
you.” 

The two young men had so much news to exchange that they did 
not know where to begin. So much had happened to both of them 
since they had last met. They plied each other with questions, and 
talked on without waiting for answers. They were so engrossed in 
conversation that they did not hear the engine whistle and it was 
only when the train began to move out of the station that they 
separated. 

They still had so much to say to each other, but the train was 
already gathering speed and Sergei, shouting something to his 
friend, raced along the platform and caught on to the open door of 
one of the freight cars. Several hands from within snatched him up 
and drew him inside. As Pavel stood watching him go he suddenly 
remembered that Sergei knew nothing about Valya’s d eath. For he 
had not visited Shepetovka since he left it, and in the unexpectedness 
of this encounter Pavel had forgotten to tell him. 

“It’s a good thing he does not know, his mind will be at ease,” 
thought Pavel. He did not know that he was never to see his friend 
again. Nor did Sergei, standing on the roof of the car, his chest 
exposed to the autumn wind, know that he was going to his death. 

“Get down from there, Seryozha,” urged Doroshenko, a Red Army 
man wearing a coat with a hole burnt in the back. 

“That’s all right,” said Sergei laughing. “The wind and I are good 
friends.” 


220 


A week later he was struck by a stray bullet in his first engagement. 
He staggered forward, his chest rent by a tearing pain, clutched at the 
air, and pressing his arms tightly against his chest, he swayed and 
dropped heavily to the ground and his sightless blue eyes stared out 
over the boundless Ukrainian steppe. 

His nerve-wracking work in the Cheka began to tell on Pavel’s 
weakened condition. His violent headaches became more frequent, 
but it was not until he fainted one day after two sleepless nights that 
he finally decided to take the matter up with Zhukhrai. 

“Don’t you think I ought to try some other sort of work, Fyodor? 
I would like best of all to work at my own trade at the main machine 
shop. I’m afraid there’s something wrong with my head. They told me 
in the medical commission that I was unfit for army service. But this 
sort of work is worse than the front. The two days we spent rounding 
up Sutyr’s band have knocked me out completely. I must have a rest 
from all these skirmishes. You see, Fyodor, I shan’t be much good to 
you if I can barely stand on my feet.” 

Zhukhrai studied Pavel’s face with concern. 

“Yes, you don’t look so good. It’s all my fault. I ought to have let 
you go long before this. But I’ve been too busy to notice.” 

Shortly after the above conversation Pavel presented himself at 
the Regional Committee of the Komsomol with a paper certifying 
that he was being placed at the Committee’s disposal. An officious 
youngster with his cap perched jauntily over onto his nose ran his 
eyes rapidly over the paper and winked to Pavel: 

“From the Cheka, eh? A jolly organisation that. We’ll find work 
for you here in a jiffy. We need everybody we can get. Where would 
you like to go? Commissary department? No? All right. What about 
the agitation section down at the waterfront? No? Too bad. Nice soft 
job that, special rations too.” 

Pavel interrupted him. 

“I would prefer the main car shops,” he said. The lad gaped. 


221 


“Car shops? Mm... I don’t think we need anybody there. But go to 
Ustinovich. She’ll fit you in somewhere.” 

After a brief interview with the dark-complexioned Ustinovich 
it was decided to assign Pavel as secretary of the Komsomol 
organisation in the railway shops where he was to work. 

Meanwhile the Whites had been fortifying the gates of the Crimea, 
and now on this narrow neck of land that once had been the frontier 
between the Crimean Tatars and the Zaporozhye Cossack settlements 
stood the modernised fortified line of Perekop. 

And behind Perekop in the Crimea, the old world, driven here 
from all corners of the lard, lived in wine-fuddled revelry, blinded by 
a false sense of security to its approaching doom. 

One chill dank autumn night tens of thousands of sons of the 
toiling people plunged into the icy waters of the Sivash to cross 
the bay under the cover of darkness and strike from behind at the 
enemy entrenched in their forts. Among the thousands waded Ivan 
Zharky, carrying his machine gun on his head to prevent it from 
getting wet. 

And when dawn found Perekop seething in a wild turmoil, its 
fortifications attacked in a frontal assault, the first columns of men 
that had crossed the Sivash climbed ashore on Litovsky Peninsula to 
take the Whites from the rear. And among the first to clamber onto 
that rocky coast was Ivan Zharky. 

A battle of unprecedented ferocity ensued. The White cavalry 
bore down savagely on the Red Army men as they emerged from the 
water. Zharky’s machine gun spewed death, never ceasing its lethal 
tattoo. Men and horses fell in heaps under the leaden spray. Zharky 
fed new magazines into the gun with feverish speed. 

Perekop thundered back through the throats of hundreds of guns. 
The very earth seemed to have dropped into a bottomless abyss, 
and death carried by thousands of shells pierced the heavens with 
ear-splitting screams and exploded, scattering myriads of minute 


222 


fragments far and wide. The tom and lacerated earth spouted up in 
black clouds that blotted out the sun. 

The monster’s head was crushed, and into the Crimea swept the 
Red flood of the First Cavalry Army to deliver the final, smashing 
blow. Frantic with terror, the Whitebeards rushed in a panic to board 
the ships leaving the ports. 

To shabby tunics, over the spot where stout hearts throbbed, 
the Republic pinned the golden Order of the Red Banner, and one 
of these tunics was that of the Komsomol machine gunner Ivan 
Zharky. 

Peace was signed with the Poles and, as Zhukhrai had predicted, 
Shepetovka remained in Soviet Ukraine. A river thirty-five kilometres 
outside the town now marked the frontier. 

One memorable morning in December 1920 Pavel arrived in his 
native town. He stepped onto the snowy platform, glanced up at the 
sign Shepetovka /, then turned left, and went straight to the depot and 
asked for Artem. But his brother was not there. Drawing his army 
coat tighter about him, Pavel strode off through the woods to the 
town. 

Maria Yakovlevna turned when the knock came at the door and 
said “Come in.” A snow-covered figure pushed into the house and she 
saw the dear face of her son. Her hand flew to her heart and the joy 
that flooded her being robbed her of speech. 

She fell on her son’s breast and smothered his face with kisses, and 
tears of happiness streamed down her cheeks. And Pavel, pressing the 
spare little body close, gazed silently down at the careworn face of 
his mother furrowed with deep lines of pain and anxiety, and waited 
for her to grow calmer. 

Once again the light of happiness shone in the eyes of this 
woman who had suffered so much. It seemed she would never have 
her fill of gazing at this son whom she had lost all hope of ever 
seeing again. Her joy knew no bounds when three days later Artem 
too barged into the tiny room late at night with his kitbag over his 
shoulders. 


223 


Now the Korchagin family was reunited. Both brothers had 
escaped death, and after harrowing ordeals and trials they had met 
again. 

“What are you going to do now?” the mother asked her sons. 

“It’s back to the car-shops for me, mother!” replied Artem gaily. 

As for Pavel, after two weeks at home he went back to Kiev where 
his work was awaiting him. 

End of Part One 


224 


KEY TO PRINCIPAL CHARACTERS OF 

J-fow the SteeCTVas Tempered 

BY NIKOLAI OSTROVSKY 

KORCHAGIN, PAVEL also Pavka, Pavlusha, Pavlushka 

BRUZZHAK, SERGEI also Seryozha, Seryozhka 

KORCHAGIN, ARTEM also Artem Andreyevich, Artem 

ZHUKHRAI also Fyodor 

PROKHOR also Prokhoshka 

POLENTOVSKY, STANISLAV ZIGMUNDOVICH 

BRUZZHAK, ZAKHAR also Zakhar Vasilievich 

ZHARKY, IVAN also Vanya, Vanka 

DUBAVA, DMITRI also Mityal 

OKUNEV, NIKOLAI also Kolya 

TOKAREV also Anton Mkiforovich 

PANKRATOV also Ignat, Genka 

TSVETAYEV also Dimka 

LISITSYN, NIKOLAI also Nikolai Nikolayevich, Kolya 
KHOROVODKO also Grisha, Grishutka 


225 


Notes on the 2004 Edition 


A small number of inconsistencies and oddities have been 

altered in the 2004 Australian Edition to improve readability. 

1 All spelling has been standardised to “UK English”. 

2 All measurements have been standardised to Metric. 

3 Where a Russian word denotes the gender of a 
character but the equivalent English word makes 
distinction the words have been standardised to 
gender neutral. Eg. “citizeness” becomes “citizen” 
and “janitress” becomes “janitor”. 

4 Some of the English words and phrases used are 
now archaic, or the meaning of the words have 
changed An appropriate modern equivalent has 
been substituted. Thus “His horny hand” has 
become “His gnarled hand”. 


226 

